The Project Gutenberg eBook, Roberts' Chester Guide [1858], by Hugh
Roberts, Edited by John Hicklin


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Roberts' Chester Guide [1858]


Author: Hugh Roberts

Editor: John Hicklin

Release Date: July 1, 2020  [eBook #62534]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROBERTS' CHESTER GUIDE [1858]***


Transcribed from the [1858] Hugh Roberts edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

                             [Picture: Cover]

 [Picture: Decorative graphic for Evans & Gresty, Engravers, 71 Eastgate
                              Row, Chester]

                   [Picture: Chester from Curzon Park]

                        [Picture: Plan of Chester]





                                 ROBERTS’
                              CHESTER GUIDE;


                                   WITH

                          FORTY-SIX ENGRAVINGS.

                                  AND AN

                      ILLUSTRATED PLAN OF THE CITY.

                                REVISED BY

                              JOHN HICKLIN,

 _Editor of the Chester Courant_, _and Honorary Secretary of the Chester
                              Archæological_
                         _and Historic Society_.

                                * * * * *

                                 CHESTER:
                       HUGH ROBERTS, EASTGATE ROW.
           LONDON: HAMILTON, ADAMS, & CO.; AND WHITTAKER & CO.
                          AND OTHER BOOKSELLERS.




INDEX.

                                          PAGE
Abbey Gate                                  57
Bars                                        46
Bridge Gate                                 41
Bridge                                      42
Bridge Street                               60
Cab Fares                                  106
Cathedral                                   65
Castle                                      35
Cemetery                                    35
Chester—Its Ancient History                  1
Chester—Its Ecclesiastical History          11
Chester—Its Municipal Institutions          12
Churches                                 78–90
City Gaol                                   32
County Gaol                                 37
County Hall                                 37
Dissenting Places of Worship             90–95
Distances                                  108
Eastgate                                    45
Eaton Hall                                  97
Exchange                                    56
Grosvenor Bridge                            40
Hotels                                     108
House of Industry                           35
Infirmary                                   31
Mayors of Chester                           15
Music Hall                                  58
Museum                                      30
Newgate                                     44
Northgate                                   27
Old Houses                                  54
Pemberton’s Parlour                         29
Phœnix Tower                                26
Population                                 107
Railway Station                            105
Roman Antiquities                           17
Roodeye                                     33
Rows                                        49
Schools                                     95
Streets                                     51
Training College                            29
Walls of Chester                            26
Water Gate                                  32
Water Tower                                 30




PREFACE.


THE visit of the Royal Agricultural Society of England to Chester in
July, 1858, seems a fitting occasion on which to present to the public an
entirely NEW EDITION of the CHESTER GUIDE, which has been carefully
revised throughout, with the requisite care and intelligence for securing
to strangers a useful memorial of the “old city.”  The work is also
embellished with a numerous series of engravings, and an illustrated
plan, which will facilitate the visitor’s inspection of the interesting
remains and modern attractions with which Chester abounds; and also
supply a pictorial reminiscence of scenes and places that may perchance
excite pleasant memories.  In this hope our Manual is committed to public
favour, which, the editor trusts, will be so heartily manifested, as to
require, at no very distant day, a renewal of his services as a literary
“GUIDE.”

_Chester_, _June_ 24, 1858.




ILLUSTRATIONS.

Chester, from Curzon Park                               to face page 1
Edgar’s Cave                                                         6
Stone Altars                                                        18
City Walls                                                          25
King Charles’s Tower                                                26
Water Tower, &c.                                                    30
Chester Cemetery                                                    35
Watergate Street Row                                                49
Eastgate Street                                                     53
God’s Providence House                                              54
Bishop Lloyd’s House                                                56
Old Palace House                                                    58
Chester Cathedral                                                   65
Cloisters ditto                                                     70
St. John’s Church                                                   79
Chancel Ruins of ditto                                              82
Independent Chapel                                                  92
With a Novel Plan, containing Eight Views of EATON HALL:—
  West Front                          East Front
  Grosvenor Lodge                     Eaton Lodge
  Dining Room                         Drawing Room
  Saloon                              Library
Together with Twenty-One other Illustrations:—
Chester from the Dee                Northgate Street
Eastgate Street                     Eastgate
Chester Castle                      Railway Station
Chester from Boughton Ford          Abbey Gate
Bridge Street                       Roman Bath
Watergate Street Row, North         Diocesan Training College
Savings’ Bank                       Grosvenor Bridge Exchange
Northgate Street Row                Blue Coat Hospital
Crypt, Bridge Street                Eastgate Street Row
Bridge Street Row (West)
                         and the Bridge Gate.




CHAPTER I.
THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHESTER.


THREE are but few places, if indeed there are any, which can present such
varied attractions to the antiquary as this remarkable and ancient city.
It is rich in memorable incidents and associations.  It has a history
chronicled not only in books, but in its walls, towers, rows, and
venerable remains.

The origin of Chester is of very remote date.  No definite conclusion has
been reached respecting the exact time of its foundation.  Various
hypotheses have been started, some of them grotesque and ridiculous
enough, but its origin is lost in those mists of antiquity where history
fades into fable.

It is quite clear, as an authenticated matter of fact, that Chester was
in very early possession of the Romans.  It was the headquarters of the
20th Legion, which, we find, came into Britain before the year 61; for it
had a share in the defeat of Boadicea by Suetonius.  After that important
victory this mighty and intrepid people marched onward towards North
Wales, and established their authority in Cheshire.

Scattered through the city, have been discovered many vestiges of their
power, which enable us to trace their history with considerable
distinctness.  Wherever they planted their settlements, they left
permanent records of their greatness and skill.  Many of these memorials
have been discovered, in various parts of the old city; and through the
intelligent and zealous investigations of the Chester Archæological
Society, these antiquities are now made tributary to the instruction of
the inhabitants respecting the history of their own locality.

Not only to the antiquarian, however, is Chester interesting; there is
scarcely any order of mind or taste but may here find its gratification.
Its noble arched bridge, venerable cathedral and churches, unique rows,
and ancient walls encompassing the city, with a considerable number and
variety of relics, all combine to make Chester an attractive place of
resort.  It is the metropolis of the county palatine of that name, and is
pleasantly situated above the river Dee, on a rising ground.  Its names
have been various.  Its Roman name was Deva, undoubtedly, because of its
being situated on the river Dee.  Then Cestriæ, from Castrum, “camp;” and
Castrum Legionis, “the Camp of the Legion.”  Its British names were Caer
Lleon, “the Camp of the Legion;” and Caer Lleon Vawr, or Ddyfrdwy, “the
Camp of the Great Legion on the Dee.”

During the brilliant lieutenancy of Julius Agricola, A.D. 85, it became a
Roman colony; and the place was called from them and from its situation,
Colonia Devana.  This is clearly demonstrated by a coin of Septimus Geta,
son of Severus, which has this inscription:—

                        Col. Devana. Leg. xx. Victrix.

For two or three centuries after this date, Chester appears to have
continued undisturbed in the power of the Romans; during which period “it
was a centre of operations while conquest was being produced; a centre of
civilization and commercial intercourse when the dominion of the empire
was established.  The actual form of the city, its division by streets
into four quarters, exhibits the arrangement which the Romans established
in their camp, and which they naturally transferred to the cities which
took the place of their military stations.  Traces of the work of that
wonderful people still remain on our walls, and on the rocky brows which
surround them; and excite the attention, and reward the diligence of the
antiquarian.  Those pigs of lead, the produce of Roman industry, which
are first mentioned, in ‘Camden’s Britannia,’ as being found in the
neighbourhood of Chester, and two of which have recently been discovered,
are memorials of the early period at which the mineral wealth of this
district was known, and of the commerce to which it gave rise.”  It is a
fact, clearly established by history, that to the Romans we are greatly
indebted for the introduction of a much higher order of civilization than
that which they found existing when they took possession of the country.
They were the pioneers of social and religious progress.  Previous to the
Roman invasion, the inhabitants were unacquainted with the laws and arts
of civilized life;—painted their bodies,—despised the institution of
marriage,—clothed themselves in skins,—knew very little of
agriculture,—were furious in disposition, and cruel in their religious
superstitions.  We find that the practice of human sacrifices was very
general amongst them, and in every respect their social and moral
condition rude and barbarous in the extreme.  So wedded were they to
their idolatrous worship and cruel rites, that the Romans, after their
conquest, found it necessary to abolish their religion by penal statutes;
an exercise of power which was not usual with these tolerating
conquerors.  About the year 50, the Emperor Claudius Cæsar subdued the
greater part of Britain, and received the submission of several of the
British states who inhabited the south-east part of the island.  The
other Britons, under the command of Caractacus, still maintained an
obstinate resistance, and the Romans made little progress against them
until Ostorius Scapula was sent over, in the year 50, to command their
armies.  This renowned general found the country in a state of great
excitement and dissatisfaction, but speedily advanced the Roman conquests
over the Britons—defeated Caractacus in a great battle—took him prisoner,
and sent him to Rome—where his magnanimous behaviour procured him better
treatment than those conquerors usually bestowed on native princes.  He
pardoned Caractacus and his family, and commanded that their chains
should immediately be taken off.

Holinshed is of opinion that Ostorius Scapula was the founder of Chester,
and the reasons he adduces are certainly very plausible.  He says, “It is
not unlike that it might be first built by P. Ostorius Scapula, who, as
we find, after he had subdued Caractacus, King of the Ordonices, that
inhabited the countries now called Lancashire, Cheshire, and Salopshire,
built in those parts, and among the Silures, certeine places of defense,
for the better harbrough of his men of warre, and keeping downe of such
Britaines as were still readie to move rebellion.”

Passing over the space of a few years, we find Julius Agricola completing
the conquest of this island.  Such was his formidable power and skilful
policy in governing the people, that we are told they soon became
reconciled to the supremacy of the Roman arms and language.  He quelled
their animosity to the Roman yoke, and certainly did very much for the
progress of the people in civilization, knowledge, and the arts of peace.

There is perhaps no place in the kingdom that can boast of so many
monuments of Roman skill and ingenuity as Chester; but as these will be
described in detail as we proceed, we need not specify them here.

About the year 448 the Romans withdrew from the island, after having been
masters of the most considerable part of its territory for nearly four
centuries, and left the Britons to arm for their own defence.  No sooner,
however, had the Romans withdrawn their troops, than the Scots and Picts
invaded the country with their terrible forces, and spread devastation
and ruin along the line of their march.  These vindictive and rapacious
barbarians, fired with the lust of conquest, made a pitiless onslaught
upon the property and lives of the people.  The unhappy Britons
petitioned, without effect, for the interposition of Rome, which had
declared its resolution for ever to abandon them.  The British
ambassadors were entrusted with a letter to the legate at Rome,
pathetically stating their perilous dilemma, and invoking their immediate
aid.

The intestine commotions which were then shaking the Roman empire to its
centre prevented the masters of the then world from affording the timely
aid sought at their hands.

Despairing of any reinforcement from Rome, the Britons now invoked the
aid of the Saxons, who promptly complied with the invitation, and under
Hengist and Horsa, two Saxon chiefs, who were also brothers, wrested
Chester from the hands of the invaders.  The Saxons, perceiving the
weakness of their degenerate allies, soon began to entertain the project
of conquering them, and seizing the country as their spoil.  During the
conflict which ensued between the Britons and Saxons, who from allies
became masters.  Chester was frequently taken and retaken, and suffered
severely in various sieges.  Ultimately, the Aborigines were totally
subjugated under the mightier sway of Saxon arms.

In 607 Ethelfrid, King of Northumbria, waged a sanguinary battle with the
Britons under the walls of Chester, whom he defeated.

It is recorded that he came to avenge the quarrel of St. Augustine, whose
metropolitan jurisdiction the British monks refused to admit.  Augustine
is said to have denounced against them the vengeance of heaven, for this
reason, three years previously.

Sammes, in his Antiquities of Britain, gives an interesting statement of
this celebrated battle: “Edelfrid, the strongest King of the English,
having gathered together a great army about the city of Chester, he made
a great slaughter of that nation; but when he was going to give the
onset, he espied priests and others, who were come thither to entreat God
for the success of the army, standing apart in a place of advantage; he
asked who they were, and for what purpose they had met there?  When
Edelfrid had understood the cause of their coming, he said, ‘If,
therefore, they cry unto their God against us, certainly they, although
they bear no arms, fight against us, who prosecute us by their prayers.’”

The victory was not destined, however, to be an abiding one.  The
supremacy of Ethelfrid over the Britons was not long in duration.
History tells us that a few years after he had achieved his conquest, the
united forces of Brocmail and three other British princes rescued from
his hands the possession of Chester, and put his armies to flight.  In
613, the Britons assembled in Chester, and elected Cadwon their king, who
reigned with great honour for twenty-two years.

From this period to the close of the Heptarchy, we have but very scanty
materials respecting the history of Chester.  The Britons appear to have
retained possession of it until about the year 828, when it was finally
taken by Egbert, during the reign of the British prince Mervyn and his
wife Esylht.

In a few years afterwards (894 or 895) the city underwent a heavy
calamity, from its invasion by Harold, King of the Danes, Mancolin, King
of the Scots, and another confederate prince, who are said to have
encamped on Hoole heath, near Chester, and, after a long siege, reduced
the city.  These predatory pirates were soon after attacked and conquered
by Alfred, who utterly routed them from the military defences in which
they had embosomed themselves, and destroyed all the cattle and corn of
the district.

After the evacuation of the city by the Danes, it remained in ruins until
about the year 908, when it was restored by Ethelred, the first Earl of
Mercia, and Ethelfleda, his wife, who, it is said, enlarged it to double
the extent of the Roman town.  Sir Peter Leycester says that “Ethelred
and his countess restored Caerleon, that is Legecestria, now called
Chester, after it was destroyed by the Danes, and enclosed it with new
walls, and made it nigh such two as it was before; so that the castle
that was sometime by the water without the walls, is now in the town
within the walls.”  All the narratives which have been handed down to us
of this celebrated woman represent her as possessed of incomparable
talent, great enterprise, and pure mind.  She employed the great power
and opportunity she possessed with admirable wisdom, and made them
subservient to acts of munificence and piety.  She died at Tamworth in
922, whence her body was translated to Gloucester.  Leycester gives a
lengthy record of her good deeds, which prepares us for the fact that her
loss was deeply and universally regretted throughout the whole kingdom.

                         [Picture: Edgar’s Cave]

The security of Chester against the Danish invaders was ultimately
effected by the victories of Edmund, in or about 942, after which it was
occasionally honoured by the residence of the Saxon sovereigns.  Pennant
says, King Edgar made this one of the stations in his annual
circumnavigation of his dominions.  About the year 973, he visited
Chester, attended by his court, and received the homage of his vassal
kings.  It is said that one day entering his barge, he assumed the helm,
and made his eight tributary princes row him from the palace which stood
in the field at Handbridge, opposite the castle (and which still bears
his name), up the river Dee, as far as the monastery of St. John’s.  In
the following century Chester was possessed by the Earls of Mercia, until
the Norman Conquest in 1066.  The tyranny, violence, and bloodshed which
marked the course of William the Conqueror, met with determined
resistance in various parts of the country; but in the course of six or
seven years he utterly crushed all opposition, and became absolute master
of the island.  He introduced into England the feudal system, “with its
military aristocracy, its pride, its splendour, and its iron dominion.
The importance of Chester, as a military station, was shown by its being
assigned as a fief to one of the chief leaders in the Norman army, and on
his death by its being given to the nephew of the Duke himself, under
whom it was invested with privileges which raised it almost to the rank
of a separate principality.  Under Hugh, the first Earl of Chester, and
his immediate successors, we may suppose that most of those castles were
built, which form objects of antiquarian research in the neighbourhood,
but which are melancholy records of the state of society at the time,
since they were evidently built to protect the frontiers from the
continued invasions of the Welsh.  Some of these still remain, and, from
their extent and magnificence, appear to have been the residences of the
Earls themselves.  Many more have perished, and can only be traced by the
banks which mark the outline of their plan.  These were probably of an
inferior description, and are rather to be considered as guard-houses for
the protection of some particular pass than as regular fortresses.  There
are traces of this kind at Doddleston, at Pulford, at Aldford, at Holt,
at Shotwick, beside the larger and more distinguished holds at Beeston,
Halton, Chester, and Hawarden; and probably few years passed but that
some inroad of the Welsh carried fire and slaughter to the very gates of
Chester, and swept the cattle and produce from the fields.” {7}

For many years previous to the Norman Conquest, Chester was governed by
Dukes or Earls; but William, perceiving the danger of entrusting so large
a territory in the hands of any one of his barons, curtailed the
provinces within narrower limits, and thereby crippled the power which
had often proved dangerous to the throne, and at the same time augmented
his own, by having a larger number of gifts and emoluments to bestow on
his followers.  In the first instance, William gave Chester to Gherbodus,
a noble Fleming, who, having obtained permission of the king to visit
Flanders for the transaction of some private business, there fell into
the hands of his enemies, and was obliged to resign the earldom to Hugh
Lupus, the nephew of the Conqueror, who was appointed in his stead.  The
Earldom was now erected into a Palatinate.  Camden says, “William the 1st
created Hugh, surnamed Lupus, the first Earl of Chester and Count
Palatine, and gave unto him and his heirs all the county, to be holden as
freely by the sword as the king himself held England by his crown.”

By reason of this grant, the Earls of Chester were invested with
sovereign jurisdiction, and held their own parliaments.  It is supposed
that Lupus was invested with his new dignity at Chester by William
himself, when he was present there in person in 1069.

He created several barons to assist him in his council and government,
some of whom we find upon record, as Nigel, Baron of Halton; Sir William
Maldebeng, of Malbanc, Baron of Witch Malbanc, or Nantwich; Richard de
Vernon, Baron of Shipbroke; Gilbert Venables, Baron of Kinderton; Hamon
de Massey, Baron of Dunham Massey; Warren de Poynton, Baron of Stockport;
Eustace de Monthalt, Baron of Monthalt.  He converted the church of St.
Werburgh into an abbey, by the advice of St. Anselm.

He continued Earl thirty-one years, died the 27th of July, 1101, and was
buried in the churchyard, but afterwards removed to the present
Chapter-house of the Cathedral, where his body was found in 1724, wrapped
in leather, enclosed in a stone coffin.

His Sword of Dignity forms one of the many valuable curiosities preserved
in the British Museum.  His parliament was formed of eight barons, who
were obliged to attend him.  Every baron had four esquires, every esquire
one gentleman, and every gentleman one valet.  The barons had the power
of life and death.  Hugh Lupus was succeeded by his son Richard, who was
drowned in his passage from Normandy.  He governed nineteen years, and
was succeeded by Ranulph, surnamed _Mechines_, son of Margaret, sister to
Lupus.  Ranulph died at Chester, A.D. 1129, {8} and was succeeded by the
heroic Ranulph II., surnamed _Geronjis_, who, having held the earldom
twenty-five years, was poisoned in 1153, and was buried at Chester.

Hugh II., his son, surnamed Cyvelioc, succeeded him, and continued in the
earldom twenty-eight years.  He died at Leek, in Staffordshire, and was
buried at Chester.

Hugh was succeeded by his son Ranulph, surnamed _Blundeville_, who, for
his benevolence, was styled _Ranulph the Good_.  He served in the holy
wars, and was as celebrated as any of the Seven Champions of Christendom.
After his return, he built Beeston Castle, in Cheshire, a noble and
imposing fortress, which, before the use of fire-arms, might have been
deemed impregnable.  It is built on an insulated rock, and its summit is
one hundred yards above the level of the brook that runs at its base.  It
endured three sieges during the civil wars.  The middle part of the slope
is surrounded by towers, which time, however, has dismantled; the well in
the upper part was cut through the rock to the depth of one hundred
yards; in the course of time it became nearly filled up with rubbish, but
within the last few years was cleared, built round, and enclosed, by J.
Tollemache, Esq., M.P., to whom the castle belongs.  It is ten miles
distant from Chester, on the London and North-Western Railway.

This Earl Ranulph was besieged by the Welsh in the castle of Rhuddlan,
and was relieved by Ralph Dutton, son-in-law of Roger Lacy, Constable of
Chester, at the head of a large body of fiddlers, minstrels, &c., who
were then assembled at the fair of Hugh Lupus.  A remarkable privilege of
this fair was, that no thief or malefactor that attended it should be
attached or punished, except for offences then and there committed.  With
this motley crew Dutton marched into Wales, and raised the siege; for
which Ranulph rewarded him with full power over all the instruments of
his preservation, and the privilege of licensing the minstrels.  The
anniversary of this achievement was formerly celebrated on the festival
of St. John the Baptist, by a regular procession of the minstrels to the
church of their tutelar saint, St. Werburgh, in honour of whom Hugh Lupus
granted to the minstrels, &c., the above-mentioned privilege, which is
recognized in all subsequent vagrant acts, by a special exception in
favour of the minstrel jurisdiction of the Duttons, of Dutton, in
Cheshire.  The last Earl Ranulph died in 1232, and was buried at Chester.

John Scott succeeded Ranulph, who died without issue; not without
suspicion, Leycester says, of being poisoned by the contrivance of Helene
his wife.

The Earls of Chester continued to exercise their local sovereignty for
about one hundred and sixty years.  They held that sovereignty, it is
true, as the representatives of the paramount sovereignty of the King of
England, and as owing allegiance to him in all things; but so far as the
government of the Palatinate was concerned, their rule, though nominally
mediate, was actually absolute, for the King does not appear to have
thwarted their jurisdiction, or in any way to have exerted his supreme
authority, beyond retaining a mint at Chester.

After the death of the seventh Earl, in 1237, Henry the Third united the
Earldom to the Crown; he afterwards conferred it upon his eldest son,
Prince Edward, about A.D. 1245, who, two years after this, received the
homage of his military tenants at Chester.  From that period to the
present the title of Earl of Chester has been vested in the eldest son of
the reigning sovereign, and is now held by His Royal Highness Albert,
Prince of Wales.

In 1255 Llewellyn ap Gryffid, Prince of Wales, provoked by the cruel
injuries his subjects had received from Geffrey Langley, Lieutenant of
the County under Prince Edward, carried fire and sword to the gates of
Chester.  In 1257 Henry the Third summoned his nobility and bishops to
attend, with their vassals, at Chester, in order to invade Wales; and in
1275 Edward the First appointed the city as the place for Llewellyn to do
him homage, whose refusal ended with the ruin of himself and his
principality; for in 1300 Edward of Carnarvon here received the final
acknowledgment of the Welsh to the sovereignty of England; and in a few
years afterwards, Llewellyn was brought hither a prisoner from Flint
Castle.  Richard the Second visited this his favourite city in 1397, and
in 1399 he was brought a prisoner from Flint Castle to the castle of
Chester, which Bolingbroke, afterwards Henry the Fourth, had seized.

In Owen Glendower’s wars this city was a _place d’armes_ for the English
troops in the expeditions against the Welsh, who, ever tenacious of their
independence, were as unwilling to submit to the Norman as the Saxon
yoke.

In 1459 Henry the Sixth, with Queen Margaret and her son Edward, visited
Chester, and bestowed little silver swans on the Cheshire gentlemen who
espoused her cause.

It appears that Henry the Seventh and his Queen also visited Chester in
1493.  In 1554 George Marsh, the pious martyr was publicly burnt at
Boughton, for his steadfast adherence to the Protestant faith.  In the
year 1617 the city was honoured with the presence of James the First,
when Edward Button, the then Mayor, presented the King with a gilt cup
containing one hundred jacobuses of gold.

From this time no event of any great importance appears to have
transpired, until the city was involved in the calamities of a siege, in
consequence of its loyalty to Charles the First.  The city stood the
siege for some months; but the inhabitants at last, reduced to the
extremity of famine, so that they were compelled to eat horses, dogs,
cats, and other animals, abandoned their resistance, made honourable
terms of capitulation, and yielded the city on February the 3rd, 1645–6.

Chester was, probably, in the time of the Romans, or earlier, a thriving
port.  The Saxon navy was stationed here, and it was also the seat of the
Mercian kings.  About the time of the Conquest the imports and exports
appear to have been considerable.  But as an illustration of the times we
may mention, that one article of the latter was slaves, obtained, it is
conjectured, from the captives which were made in the frequent wars with
the Welsh.  It is quite clear that Chester was, in ancient days, a busy
and nourishing port, because of the perfectly navigable condition of the
Dee.  All the early writers of its history unite in bearing testimony to
this point.  It may here be mentioned as a curious and interesting fact,
that some centuries ago, Flookersbrook was covered with water, and that a
deep and broad channel flowed through Mollington, Stanney, and that
direction, which emptied itself into the estuary now called the Mersey.
Holinshed, after tracing minutely the course of the Dee through
Flookersbrook up to Stanney, distinctly states that it “sendeth foorth
one arme by Stannie Poole, and the Parke side into Merseie arme,” &c.
Speed distinctly marks out this course in his map; and it is still more
broadly defined in an old Dutch map, of a much earlier date, printed at
Rotterdam.

In consequence of the uncertain and imperfect state of the river, the
once thriving commerce of this ancient port has dwindled into comparative
insignificance, and Liverpool has reaped the advantage.  Spirited efforts
have latterly been made to improve the navigation and port of Chester.

With regard to the ecclesiastical history of Chester, it may suffice to
observe that, according to King’s ‘Vale Royal,’ Theodore, the first
Anglo-Saxon Primate, ordained at Rome in 669, appointed St. Chad the
first Bishop of Chester, who fixed his seat at Lichfield.  “After him one
Winifred was bishop, who, for his disobedience in some points, was
deprived by Theodore, who appointed in his place one Sexulph.  The said
Theodore, by authority of a synod held at Hatfield, did divide the
province of Mercia into five bishoprics, that is to say, Chester,
Worcester, Lichfield, Cederna in Lindsey, and Dorchester, which after was
translated to Lincoln.  After Sexulf, one Aldwin was Bishop of Lichfield,
and next to him Eudulfus, who was adorned with the Archbishop’s pall,
having all the bishops under King Offa’s dominions suffragans to him.”

The diocese of Chester seems to have continued one with that of Lichfield
to the time of the Conquest, when Pennant says a Bishop of Lichfield, in
the year 1075, removed his episcopal seat to Chester, and during his life
made use of the monastery of St. John’s for his cathedral.

His successor was Robert of Lindsey, chaplain of Wm. Rufus, who removed
the see to Coventry; St. John’s church, however, continued collegiate up
to the time of the Reformation, at which period it had a dean, eight
canons or prebends, and ten vicars choral.  The prelate and his
successors, although having seats at Lichfield and Coventry, as well as
Chester, continued to have the designation of Bishop of Chester, until
the appointment of John Ketterich, in 1415, who was not so styled, nor
any of his successors until the time of the Reformation.  “The bishops
that were before that time (although they were commonly called Bishops of
Chester) were Bishops of Lichfield, and had but their seat or most
abiding in Chester.”  Henry the Eighth erected Chester into a distinct
diocese in the 33rd year of his reign, “turning the monastery of St.
Werburgh into the Bishop’s palace; unto which jurisdiction was allotted
Cheshire, Lancashire, Richmondshire, and part of Cumberland; and was
appointed to be within the province of York.”

John Bird, D.D., “formerly a fryer of the order of the Carmelites, was
the first bishop of this new foundation.”  He was deprived of his
bishopric by Queen Mary, A.D. 1544, because of his adhesion to the
Protestant faith.  He was succeeded by George Cotes, who survived his
consecration only about two years.  He died at Chester, and was buried in
the Cathedral near the Bishop’s throne.  His memory is stained with the
blood of George Marsh, who, during his episcopate, suffered martyrdom at
Boughton.  The next Bishop was Cuthbert Scott, who was vice-chancellor of
Oxford in 1554 and 1555, one of the delegates commissioned by Cardinal
Pole to visit that University, and one of the four Bishops who, with as
many divines, undertook to defend the Church of Rome against an equal
number of reformed divines.  He was deposed by Queen Elizabeth, for some
abusive expressions uttered against Her Majesty.  William Downham,
chaplain to Queen Elizabeth before she came to the crown, was consecrated
Bishop of Chester, A.D. 1561.  He died Nov., 1577, and was buried in the
choir of the Cathedral, having sat Bishop sixteen years and a half: from
that time to the present there has been a regular succession of Bishops
of the Reformed Church.

John Graham, D.D., formerly Master of Christ’s College, Cambridge, was
consecrated to the see of Chester in 1848, in succession to the present
Archbishop of Canterbury, and is at present fulfilling the duties of his
high office with pious earnestness, diligence, and general approbation.

                                * * * * *

Municipal institutions were first introduced into Britain by the Romans.
York was one of the first towns in England on which they were conferred.
We can discover very little to aid us in tracing the progressive history
of the municipal government of the ancient city of Chester until the time
of Ranulph, the third Earl Palatine, and nephew of the Earl Hugh; but
being a Roman colony, the inhabitants no doubt were regarded as Roman
citizens, and as such entitled to the same privileges which Rome itself
possessed.  Pennant supposes that the Roman prætorium occupied the site
on which St. Peter’s church is now built.  In this tribunal, if the case
be so, the civil law and power would be exercised in those days.

“Before the city had any charter,” says King’s ‘Vale Royal,’ “they used
by prescription divers liberties, and enjoyed a guild mercatory, that is,
a brotherhood of merchants, and that whosoever was not admitted of that
society, he could not use any trade or traffick within the city, nor be a
tradesman therein.  And the tenor of this guild mercatory did even run in
these words:—‘Sicut hactenus usi fuerint;’ and was after confirmed under
the Earl’s seal.  And there were appointed two overseers, and those were
appointed out of the chiefest of the citizens, and were greatly respected
of the citizens as officers that had the special care of maintaining
those privileges, before a mayor was ordained.”  These officers were
elected annually, and were denominated leave-lookers; they were
accustomed to go round the city to see that its privileges were
preserved, and sometimes used to take small sums, called
_leave-lookerage_, for _leave_ for non-freemen to sell wares by retail.

In the reign of Edward the Confessor, the government of the city was
vested in twelve judges, selected from the vassals of the king, the earl,
and the bishop.

The first charter granted to the city was by the first Ranulph, also
styled Ranulph le Meschin, third Earl of Chester, who died in 1128.  It
grants to his tenants demesne of Chester, that none but they or their
heirs shall buy or sell merchandise, brought to the city by sea or land,
except at the fairs holden at the nativity of St. John the Baptist, and
on the feast of St. Michael; and is directed thus—Ranul. com. Cestræ.
constabulario. dupifero justiciar, vicecom. baron. militibus bullivis et
omnibus servientibus suis præsentibus et futuris, salutem; Sciatis, &c.;
and so makes a large grant to the city, and warrants the same strongly
against his heirs, and appoints forfeitures upon all that shall
withstand.  The charter, which is without date, is witnessed by Domino
Hugone, Abbate Cestriæ.  Domino Hugone le Orebi, tunc. justiciar.  Warren
de Vernon, &c., &c.  It was confirmed by the other two Earls Ranulphs,
and also by Earl John, who strictly prohibited all buying and selling
except as aforesaid, with other additions.  King John and Henry the
Second also established it, with the addition of some further privileges.
Henry the Third granted three charters, in the first of which he recites,
that he hath seen the former charters of the Earls, and doth grant and
confirm domesticis hominibus Cestr. &c., that none shall buy or sell
merchandise in the city, but citizens, except in the fairs, &c., sub pœna
£10.

It was at this time that, so far as we can ascertain, the first mayor was
created. {14}  In the 26th year of Henry’s reign, Sir Walter Lynnet was
the first who was invested with civic honours and authority.  The
mayoralty of Chester is, therefore, a very ancient one, only 58 years
younger, we believe, than that of London.

In 1300 Edward the First confirmed the former charter of his father,
Henry the Third; and by the same charter gave the city of Chester, with
the appurtenances, liberties, and freedoms to the citizens of Chester and
their heirs, to be holden of him and his heirs for ever, paying yearly
£100.  He granted them also the election of coroners and pleas of the
crown, and that the citizens shall have sock, sack, toll, theme,
irfangtheof, outfangtheof, and to be free throughout all the land and
dominion of toll, passage, &c.

Many other charters follow, and other matters connected with the
government of the city.

Richard the Second, in 1347, “for the furtherance of justice and better
execution thereof, grants unto his subjects, maiors, sheriffs, and
commonality of the said city, to hold their courts; and limited what
processes they may award in actions, personal felonies, appeals, process
of uttagary, as at the common law;” and since then the sessions of the
peace have continued to be held down to the present time.

Henry Seventh, “in consideration that through the decay of the haven and
river, by many burstings forth, was become sandy and impassable, as
before, for merchandise,” remitteth £80 annually of the fee farm rent.
And the said King Henry Seventh granteth that the city of Chester and the
suburbs, towns, and hamlets thereof, the castle excepted, should be a
county of itself, by the name of the county of Chester.

Henry the Eighth sent letters in parchment under his privy seal to the
Mayor of Chester, charging that the citizens should not be pressed unto
the war, but remain within the city for the defence thereof.  He also, by
letters patent, discharged the city from being a sanctuary for
malefactors, which was by proclamation removed to Stafford.  In the 32nd
year of the same reign, the city obtained the privilege of returning two
burgesses as its representatives in the English parliament.

The important changes effected in the municipal corporations of England
and Wales in 1835 render it unnecessary to enter further into the various
charters granted to the city of Chester.  By that Act, the local
government was vested in town councillors, elected by the burgesses, and
who serve for a term of three years.  Chester is divided into five wards
for the election of the council; each ward elects six councillors, two of
whom retire from office annually.  The councillors elect ten aldermen,
who hold their office for six years; and any member of the council is
eligible to the office of mayor.

The following is a list of those who have served the office of mayor of
Chester:—

  1251 Sir Walter Lynnett, Knt.

  1677 William Ince, Esq.

  1696 Peter Bennet, Esq.

  1700 Hugh Starkie, Esq.

  1702 William, Earl of Derby.

  1704 Edward Partington, Esq.

  1705 Edward Puleston, Esq.

  1708 James Mainwaring, Esq.

  1709 William Allen, Esq.

  1710 Thomas Partington, Esq.

  1711 John Minshull, Esq.

  1712 John Thomason, Esq.

  1714 Francis Sayer, Esq.

  1715 John Stringer, Esq.

  1715 Sir Richd. Grosvenor, Bart.

  1716 Henry Bennett, Esq.

  1717 John Hodgson, Esq.

  1718 Alexander Denton, Esq.

  1719 Randle Bingley, Esq.

  1720 Thomas Edwards, Esq.

  1725 John Parker, Esq.

  1729 Thomas Brock, Esq.

  1731 Trafford Massie, Esq.

  1733 Peter Ellamies, Esq.

  1734 Roger Massie, Esq.

  1736 W. W. Wynn, Esq.

  1737 Sir Robt. Grosvenor, Bart.

  1738 Nathanael Wright, Esq.

  1743 Thomas Davies, Esq.

  1744 Thomas Maddock, Esq.

  1745 Henry Ridley, Esq.

  1746 Edward Yearsley, Esq.

  1747 William Edwards, Esq.

  1748 Edward Griffith, Esq.

  1750 John Hallwood, Esq.

  1754 Wm. Cooper, Esq., M.D.

  1757 Richard Richardson, Esq.

  1758 Thomas Grosvenor, Esq.

  1759 Thos. Cholmondeley, Esq.

  1760 Thomas Cotgreave, Esq.

  1761 Holme Burrows, Esq.

  1763 Edward Burrows, Esq.

  1764 George French, Esq.

  1765 Sir W. W. Wynn, Bart.

  1769 Gabriel Smith, Esq.

  1773 Panton Ellamies, Esq.

  1779 Thomas Amery, Esq.

  1781 Henry Higg, Esq.

  1783 John Hallwood, Esq.

  1784 William Harrison, Esq.

  1787 Sir Richd. Grosvenor, Bart.

  1795 Richard Ollerhead, Esq.

  1803 Edmund Bushell, Esq.

  1807 Robert, Earl Grosvenor.

  1809 Thomas Evans, Esq.

  1810 Thomas Grosvenor, Esq.

  1811 Robert Bowers, Esq.

  1813 Sir W. W. Wynn, Bart.

  1814 John Bedward, Esq.

  1815 Sir J. Cotgreave, Knt.

  1816 Thomas Francis, Esq.

  1817 Henry Bowers, Esq.

  1818 Thomas Bradford, Esq.

  1819 John Williamson, Esq.

  1820 William Seller, Esq.

  1821 John S. Rogers, Esq.

  1822 William Massey, Esq.

  1823 Robert Morris, Esq.

  1824 George Harrison, Esq.

  1825 John Fletcher, Esq.

  1826 John Larden, Esq.

  1827 Thomas Francis, Esq.

  1827 Henry Bowers, Esq.

  1828 Robert Morris, Esq.

  1829 William Moss, Esq.

  1830 Titus Chaloner, Esq.

  1831 Richard Buckley, Esq.

  1831 George Harrison, Esq.

  1832 John Fletcher, Esq.

  1833 George Harrison, Esq.

  1834 The same.

  1835 The same.

  1836 William Cross, Esq.

  1837 Thomas Dixon, Esq.

  1838 Ed. Samuel Walker, Esq.

  1839 John Uniacke, Esq.

  1840 The same.

  1841 William Wardell, Esq.

  1842 William Brown, Esq.

  1843 Wm. Henry Brown, Esq.

  1844 Henry Kelsall, Esq.

  1845 Charles Potts, Esq.

  1846 Edward Tilston, Esq.

  1847 R. P. Jones, Esq., M.D.

  1848 The same.

  1849 Sir E. S. Walker, Knt.

  1850 John Williams, Esq.

  1851 The same.

  1852 P. S. Humberston, Esq.

  1853 Henry Brown.  Esq., who, dying during his mayoralty, Dr. R. P.
  Jones was appointed to the office for the unexpired period.

  1854 John Smith, Esq.

  1855 W. H. Brown, Esq.

  1856 Major French.

  1857 Peter Eaton, Esq.

  1858 P. S. Humberston, Esq.




CHAPTER II.
ROMAN ANTIQUITIES.


ALTARS, Roman pavements, pigs of lead, coins, and other precious relics
of former times, have been discovered in various places in the city and
neighbourhood, some of them within a very recent period.  Now that the
people are happily being taught to estimate local antiquities at their
proper worth, and a spirit of inquiry is being invoked respecting them,
it is to be hoped that any future discoveries that may be made will be
carefully preserved.  There is no doubt that, through recklessness or
ignorance, many links in the chain of our local history have been
neglected and lost.

On a projecting rock in Handbridge, situate at the south end of the
bridge, is a sculptured figure of Minerva, with her symbol, the owl.
Time has very much obliterated and defaced this ancient sculpture, called
Edgar’s Cave, which is doubtless of Roman date.  Close to the figure is a
great hole in the rock; and the field in which it is situated is known by
the name of Edgar’s field to the present day.

In the year 1653 an altar, supposed to have been dedicated to Jupiter,
was dug up in Foregate-street, and which is preserved among the
Arundelian marbles at Oxford.  The back of it is plain: on the sides of
it there are neatly sculptured a Patera, a cup which was used in their
libations; and a Thuribulum, or censer for burning incense.  The
inscription, when perfect, was—

                              I . O . M . TANARO
                             T . ELVPIVS . GALER
                               PRAESENS . GUNTA
                            PRI . LEG . XX . V . V
                           COMMODO . ET . LATERANO
                                     COS
                                V . S . L . M.

which Leigh, in his ‘Natural History of Lancashire and Cheshire,’
explains thus—

                          JOVI OPTIMO MAXIMO TANARO
                            TITUS ELUPIUS GALERIUS
                              PRÆSENS GUBERNATOR
                PRINCIBUS LEGIONIS VICESSIMÆ VICTRICIÆ VALERIÆ
                       COMMODO ET LATERANO CONSULIBUS,
                         VOTUM SOLVIT LUBENS MERITO.

In the year 1693, on the occasion of digging a place for a cellar in
Eastgate-street, an altar was found buried amongst a great quantity of
ashes, horns, and bones of several animals.  On the back of the altar is
represented a curtain with a festoon, over which is a globe surrounded
with palm branches.  On one side is a vase with two handles, from which
issue acanthus leaves, supporting a basket of fruit; on the other side is
a Genius with a Cornucopia in his left hand, and an altar on his right:
on the top of the altar is a well sculptured human face within the
Thuribulum.

This altar was found with the inscription downwards, and near it were two
medals, one of Vespasian, the other is assigned to Constantius Chlorus,
son-in-law of Maximian.  The inscription, with restorations, runs thus:—

                              PRO . SAL . DOMIN
                               ORUM . NN . INVI
                                 CTISSIMORVM
                             AVGG . GENIO . LOCI
                               FLAVIVS . LONGVS
                          TRIB . MIL . LEG . XX . VV
                                LONGINVS . FIL
                                 EIVS . DOMO
                                   SAMOSATA
                                    V . S

Mr. Roach Smith says, “The persons who erected this altar were of
Samosata, a town of Syria, celebrated as the birth-place of Lucian.”

In 1779 an altar was found in Watergate-street, which is still preserved
in the grounds of Oulton Park, the seat of Sir Philip de Malpas Grey
Egerton, Bart, M.P.: at the sides are the rod of Esculapius, the
Cornucopiæ and rudder, a patera, urn, sacrificial knife, and other
instruments.  The inscription, with a few restorations, is as follows:—

                              FORTVNAE . REDVCI
                         ESCVLAP . ET . SALVTI . EIVS
                            LIBERT . ET . FAMILIA
                   CAII . PONTII . T . F . CAL . MAMILIANI
                       RVFI . ANTISTIANI . FVNINSVLANI
                            VETTONIANI . LEG . AVG
                                    D . D

                           [Picture: Stone Altars]

In the year 1821 a handsome altar was found by some labourers in a field
called “The Daniels,” in Great Boughton, near Chester, between the Tarvin
and Huntingdon roads: it is now preserved at Eaton Hall, the seat of the
Marquis of Westminster.  It is of red sandstone; the mouldings are bold,
but it has no other ornaments upon it except the scrolls which support
the Thuribulum.  The inscription is the same on both sides, and is as
follows:—

                                   NYMPHIS
                                      ET
                                   FONTIBVS
                                   LEG XX.
                                     V V

It has been supposed that the reason why this altar was erected on that
particular spot, was because of the pure water which springs on that side
of the town: the old Abbot’s well is in that quarter, whence water was
formerly conveyed by pipes to some of the monasteries in Chester.

In 1729, in digging a cellar in Watergate-street, a stone was found with
an inscription, of which the following fragment only remains:—

                                 NVMINI . AVG
                                 ALMAE . CET
                                 NVS . ACTOR
                               EX . VOTO . FACI

In the Chapter-house of Chester Cathedral, there is a red sandstone, 24
inches by 8 inches, found on the site of the Deanery, bearing this
inscription:—

                             COH . I . E. OCRATI
                               MAXIMINI . M . P

Mr. Roach Smith, an eminent authority in such matters, says that this
inscription is to be ascribed to the century of Ocratius Maximus, of the
first Cohort of the 20th Legion: it has evidently been a facing stone,
probably in the city wall; it resembles in character the centurial
commemorations on the stones in the great northern wall, and, like them,
apparently refers to the completion of a certain quantity of building.

In the year 1738, in digging the foundation of a house in the
market-place, a fragment of a slate stone was found, on which was cut in
bas-relief, the figure of a Retiarius armed with his trident and net, and
a considerable part of the shield of the Secutor.  The Secutores and the
Retiarii were gladiators, distinguished by their armour and manner of
fighting.  They bore in their left hand a trident, and in the right a
net, with which the combatant attempted to entangle his adversary, by
throwing it over his head, and suddenly drawing it together, and then
with his trident he usually slew him.

Horsley describes a small statue of stone found near the Dee, supposed to
be either Atys or Mithras.  It had a Phrygian bonnet, a mantle on the
shoulders, a short vest on the body, and a declining torch in the hands.

On pulling down the old Eastgate in 1768, some portions of the original
Roman structure were discovered, consisting of four arches, two in a
line, and fifteen feet distant from each other; between the two arches
fronting the east was a statue of the god Mars, holding in his right hand
a spear handle, and his left resting on a shield.  This was cut in one
large stone, of about a half ton weight.  There was also found a piece of
rude sculpture about two feet in height, representing a Roman soldier.

In the year 1800 a Roman Ring, with an onyx stone in the centre, was
found by some workmen when digging in a garden in Upper Northgate-street,
and is now in the possession of R. J. Hastings, Esq., of Chester.

In 1803 part of a mosaic pavement, about five feet square, was discovered
about six feet below the surface of the earth, on digging a cellar in
what was then known by the name of the Nun’s Garden, near the Castle.

In 1813 in sinking the foundation of a cellar at Netherleigh House, a
short distance from Chester, a considerable number of large vases of red
clay were discovered; they were regularly arranged in vaults, each vault
containing four or six vases.  Some of these were filled with calcined
bones and small lumps of white clay.  One of the vases was secured in a
perfect state, but the others in most part were destroyed, through the
carelessness of the workmen.  A demi-figure, habited in a sacerdotal
costume, was found at the same time.

In 1814 a tesselated pavement was discovered near the gateway of the
Castle, in making the alterations there, part of which was destroyed, and
the remainder covered up again.

In April, 1850, whilst excavating for a drain on the premises belonging
to Mr. Wynne, carpenter, on the east side of Bridge-street, adjoining the
Feathers-lane, a portion of a tile flooring, of mediæval construction,
was discovered, in a remarkably good state of preservation.  This floor
was made the subject of a lecture by Mr. Harrison, architect, which is
embodied in the reports published by the Chester Archæological Society.
Large square Roman tiles of red clay are frequently found in removing old
buildings, and breaking up the pavements, in Chester.  Many of these are
stamped with the inscription of the 20th Legion, LEG. XX. VV., and others
are marked, LEG. VV. Œ.

These tiles were manufactured by the soldiers of the Legion, who were
accomplished masons, being trained to use the pickaxe, spade, and trowel,
as well as military arms.  In times of peace they were employed in
building houses and public edifices, constructing roads, and tilling the
fields.  To them “we are indebted for nearly all the inscriptions
discovered in this country, which abound in the districts where they were
regularly quartered, or employed on public works, and are comparatively
scarce in other localities.”

A great number of coins have been found at various times within the walls
of Chester, of Vespasian, Trajan, Hadrian, Fl. Val. Constantius, and
other Roman emperors, some in brass and others in silver.  A very fine
gold coin of Faustina the elder, wife of Antonius Pius, was found a few
years ago, near the Castle; and in 1826 a very beautiful gold coin was
dug up in a field at the east end of Captain Wrench’s house, which is in
the possession of Captain Wrench.  On the obverse is the head of Nero,
with his title, NERO CESAR AVGVSTVS, and on the reverse is a figure in a
sitting posture, and the legend SALVS.

Whilst excavating a drain in Grosvenor-street, in 1828, several coins
were found, some of which were in very good preservation, especially one
of Trajan and another of Geta.  A lamp made of lead, and an ivory stylus,
were also dug up at the same time.  In the same year was found, near the
new church of St. Bridget, a small altar, without any inscription to
assist the antiquarian in ascertaining anything respecting its
dedication.  Within the space of a few inches from the altar was found a
brass medal, on which the figure of the god Neptune is clearly
delineated, with his trident, and a ship with her sails.  The legend on
it is NEPTVNVS; on the reverse is Hercules with his club, and a female
figure by his side, and around is the inscription HERCVLES ET PALLAS.

A short time ago a small votive altar was found by W. Ayrton, Esq., at
Boughton, near to the spot where the altar, previously described as
dedicated to the Nymphs, was discovered.

The inscription has been interpreted thus:—

                       GENO. AVERNI. IVL. QVINTILIANVS.
                Julius Quintilianus to the Genius of Avernus.

Examples of dedication to genii are very numerous; the belief that they
presided over the welfare of cities, families, and individuals, was part
of the religious system of the Romans.  It was generally believed that
every individual had two genii, the one good, the other bad.  With
reference to the particular inscription to the genius Avernus, Mr. Roach
Smith says, “that he finds no other mention: but the locality in which
the altar was found confirms the literal interpretation that the genius
of the well known lake in Carpania is here to be understood as addressed
by Julius Quintilianus.  The waters of the lake were much used by the
Romans in magical rites, as the classical reader will be reminded by the
line in Virgil’s description of the incantation scene, preparatory to
Dido’s death:—

              “‘Sparserat et latices simulatos fontis Averni.’”

A short time ago there was found in Common Hall-street, imbedded in a
thick wall several feet under ground, a singular block or pig of lead.

Unfortunately the inscription has only been partially preserved, inasmuch
as it presents a different reading from others which have been
discovered, and which Camden mentions as being very general in Cheshire;
but those which he records as having come under his notice had inscribed
on them:—

                    IMP . DOMIT . AVG . GER . DE . CEANG.

These pigs of lead appear to have been paid as tribute by the Britons to
their Roman masters, “the harsh exaction of which was one of the causes
of the insurrection.”

A great quantity of the Red Samian, and other kinds of pottery, have been
discovered within the walls of Chester, which are supposed to have been
of foreign origin.  The names of the potters were:—

    HIVNV.—SEV. . . .—BELINOIM.—ALBINVS.—BITVRIX.—ATILLVS.—VABIVS . F.—I
    | OFFIC.—CRESI . M.—PVONI . M.—E S CV S I . M.

The following recent discoveries we extract from the First Report of the
Chester Architectural, Archæological, and Historic Society, incorporated
in a most able and interesting paper by C. Roach Smith, Esq.

_Weaver-street_.—In excavating for sewers was found, at the depth of
seven feet, a raised foot-path, edged with curb-stones, and a regular
paved road, of marble stones set in sand; four feet above this, a layer
of charcoal; at ten or eleven feet deep, a quantity of Roman tile.

_Common Hall-street_.—Up the centre, a row of foundations formed of
concrete (broken marble stones in hard mortar), about nine feet apart,
all in a line, and about ten feet deep, presenting the appearance of
having supported columns.  A large square block of stone, four feet two
inches square, and sixteen inches deep, without lewis holes, on a bed of
concrete.  A portion of a column of very debased classical form, about
two feet in diameter; at the top is a hole, four inches and a half
square, and the same deep, and a similar hole at the bottom; the square
part seems never to have been smoothly dressed; the workmen said it was
fast to the grouted concrete, at the depth of ten feet; mouldings, broken
tiles, and pottery, coins of Pius, Tetricus, &c.; a quantity of animals’
bones, a stag’s skull, with the horns sawn off, and a wild boar’s tusk.
In the adjoining street, a moulded block of cornice, eight inches thick,
on the under side of which is a rude inscription; imbedded in a thick
wall, at the same place, a pig of lead; a capital of a pillar.  The tiles
are of various forms, some overlapping one another, some with a kind of
pattern or letters, others with marks of animals’ feet.  One perfect,
twenty-one inches by thirteen, of singular form.  Also, what appears to
have been a portion of a gable end.

In December, 1850, whilst fresh drains were being made, an old Roman vase
was found in a yard belonging to Mr. Parkinson, plumber, in
Northgate-street, between the Abbey-square and the Abbey Green.  The
labourer who was employed in the drain in that neighbourhood unhappily
shattered this vase in pieces.  The fragments, however, were collected
together with great care, and re-united by Mr. Parkinson, in whose
possession it now remains.  There were found with it some portions of
annular brass money, much corroded.

Near to the Feathers Hotel, in Bridge-street, in a cellar now occupied as
an earthenware shop, are the remains of the Roman hypocaust and sweating
bath, the use of which appears to have been very general amongst the
Romans, and regarded by them as one of their chief luxuries.  From the
details which have been handed down to us by ancient historians,
respecting these curious erections, we learn that they were not only
constructed so as to secure the comfort and convenience of the bathers to
the fullest extent, but were often built in the most magnificent style of
architecture.  The one in Bridge-street, which circumstances have happily
spared, is in a tolerably perfect state.  It is fifteen feet long, and
eight wide, and six feet seven inches deep.  There is an adjoining
chamber, or _præfurnium_, of the same dimensions.  The Hypocaust is
supported by twenty-eight square pillars, two feet eight inches high, and
one foot square at the top and bottom.  Over these pillars are placed
bricks, eighteen inches square, and three inches thick, which support
others two feet square, perforated with small holes, about six inches
asunder, for the purpose of conveying the heat upwards.  Immediately
above this uppermost layer of bricks is a terrace floor, composed of
several layers of lime, pounded bricks, &c., in different proportions and
degrees of fineness.  The room above is the Sudatorium, or Sweating Room,
which received the hot air from the Hypocaust below.  Around the walls
were benches, rising one above another, on which the bathers sat, until
they burst out into a free perspiration; after which they were scraped
with a bronze instrument called a _Strigil_—thin and flexible, like a
hoop—by which all impurities were removed from the skin; they were then
_shampooed_, rubbed down with towels (_Lintea_), and their bodies
anointed with oil, by an attendant called _Aliptes_, after which they
returned to the _Tepidarium_, where they attired themselves, and cooled
gradually before returning to the open air.

In 1779, another Hypocaust, and the remains of several adjoining rooms of
a Roman house, were discovered in digging the foundations of houses near
the Watergate.  The pillars of this Hypocaust, the altar dedicated to
_Fortuna Redux_, _Esculapius et Salus_, and a few other antiquities, were
found at the same time, and were removed to Oulton Park.

But small portions of the original Roman wall of Chester now exist,
although undoubted vestiges of that ancient work are easily discernible.
The present wall, no doubt, stands on the original foundation.  The Roman
pavement has been often discovered at the depth of a few feet below the
modern road, in the principal streets, which, in all probability, run in
the same direction as those of the Roman City.  During the last few
years, many remarkable antiquities have been discovered in making
excavations for new buildings; and among such remains, a fine Roman
altar, bearing a Greek inscription, has excited great interest and
speculation.

                          [Picture: City Walls]




CHAPTER III.
A WALK ROUND THE WALLS OF CHESTER.


THE Chester walls are the only perfect specimen of this order of ancient
fortification now to be met with in England.  There is nothing, perhaps,
which impresses a stranger more forcibly, or sooner attracts his interest
and curiosity, than these embattled memorials of the olden time.

In King’s ‘Vale Royal’ it is stated that they were first built by Marius,
King of the Britons, A.D. 73.  Leland and Selden, both authors of credit,
attribute to the Romans the foundation of Chester.  According to Geoffry
of Monmouth, Higden, Bradshaw the Monk, and Stowe, it is of an origin
more ancient than Rome itself, and was only re-edified by the
legionaries; but, in support of their assertions, the aforesaid writers,
all of whom delight in the marvellous, give no other authority save vague
tradition.  On the other hand, the Walls of Chester, at this hour, bear
witness to the truth of Leland and Selden’s account of their origin.

They are built of soft freestone, and command extensive and beautiful
prospects.  The view from the Northgate, with the Welsh Hills in the
distance, is universally admired.  The Walls are a mile and
three-quarters and one hundred and twenty-one yards in circumference, and
are kept in repair by the Corporation.

We commence our perambulation at a flight of steps on the North side of
the Eastgate.  Proceeding to the right a short distance, the venerable
Cathedral arrests our attention.

At the end of Abbey-street is a small archway or passage through the
Walls, leading to the Kale-yards, or cabbage gardens, which formerly
belonged to the Abbot and Convent of St. Werburgh.  This opening was
permitted to be made for their convenience, in the reign of Edward I., to
prevent the necessity of bringing their vegetables by a circuitous road
through the Eastgate.

A few paces farther on was a quadrangular abutment, on which formerly
stood a tower called _The Sadlers’ Tower_, from the Company of Sadlers
holding their meetings there.  The tower was taken down in 1780; and the
abutment, which marked the place where it stood, was taken down, in 1828.

The elevated tower on the Canal bank belongs to the extensive Shot and
White Lead Manufactory of Messrs. Walker, Parker, and Co., and forms a
prominent object in the different approaches to the City.

The lofty tower which stands at the angle is called



THE PHŒNIX TOWER,


which was formerly used by some of the companies of the city, whose arms
were placed upon it, as a chamber for business.  Of these the _Phœnix_,
the crest of the Painters’ and Stationers’ Company, which was put up in
1613, now only remains.

From the summit of this tower, King Charles I. had the mortification to
see his army, under the generalship of Sir Marmaduke Langdale, defeated
by the Parliamentary forces, which were led by General Pointz, at the
battle of Rowton Moor, on the 27th September, 1645.  From its elevation
and command of view over the township of Newton, it was formerly called
_Newton’s Tower_.  Linked as it is with that eventful battle during one
of the most significant epochs of our national history, it is not
surprising that it is always regarded with intense curiosity, as a
suggestive memorial of most interesting occurrences.  The mind is
involuntarily carried back to the period when our country was involved in
the discord, strife, and bloodshed of civil war; and, perhaps, as
involuntarily reflects on the genial and happy change which the progress
of knowledge, freedom, and religion has accomplished in the minds and
institutions of the people.  We can now occupy the very spot on which the
hapless monarch beheld the discomfiture of his hopes and power; but can
gaze upon a prospect very different from that which greeted his vision,
and with emotions more grateful than those which then distracted the
monarch’s breast.  His Majesty remained that night in Chester, and on the
following day marched with 500 horse into Wales.

Beneath the walls here, deeply cut in the solid rock, is the Ellesmere
and Chester Canal.

Between the Eastgate and Phœnix Tower the remains of the Roman Walls are
conspicuous in the lower courses.  At the distance of about seven feet
from the top of the parapet, the Roman portion is terminated by a
cornice, which extends in broken lengths for at least 100 yards.

           [Picture: King Charles’ Tower, City Walls, Chester]

In the time of the great Rebellion, a ditch surrounded the Walls, from
the Eastgate to the Water Tower.  The view which is obtained from the
elevation of this part of the Walls is very extensive and beautiful.  As
you approach the North from the Eastgate, the ranges of Peckforton Hills,
Beeston Castle, and the Forest of Delamere, form the background of the
landscape, marked on the foreground with Waverton and Christleton
churches; and, still nearer, the commodious Railway Station.

Next we arrive at



THE NORTHGATE.


The ancient gate, over which the gaol was situated, and where criminals
were formerly executed, was taken down in 1808, and the prisoners removed
to a more commodious building on the south side of the infirmary.

The present gate is a Doric structure, forming a capacious elliptic arch
of white stone, divided from two smaller ones at the sides by two
pillars.  It was erected at the expense of the late Marquis of
Westminster.  The North side bears this inscription—

                      PORTAM SEPTENTRIONALEM SVBSTRVCTAM
                       A ROMANIS VETVSTATE JAM DILAPSAM
                    IMPENSIS SVIS AB INTEGRO RESTITVENDAM
                      CVRAVIT ROBERTVS COMES GROSVENOR.
                           A. R. GEORGII TERTII LI.

On the South side is the following:—

                      INCHOTA GVLIELMO NEWELL ARM. MAI.
                                  MDCCCVIII.
                      PERFECTA THOMA GROSVENOR ARM. MAI.
                                   MDCCCX.
                          THOMA HARRISON ABCHITECTO.

The summit of this gate commands a most extensive and delightful
prospect.  On each side of the gate is a commodious flight of steps, by
which the passenger may descend into Northgate-street.

Near the gate, and on the left hand of Upper Northgate-street, stands the
Blue-coat Hospital, which was founded by subscription in 1700, at the
suggestion of Bishop Stratford.  The greater part of the present
structure was built in 1717, partly at the expense of the Corporation and
partly by benefactions.  Thirty-two boys are boarded, clothed, and
educated, from the age of twelve to fourteen.  There are also sixty
probationary day scholars, who succeed to the vacancies of the former.
They are well educated in the various branches of useful knowledge, and
at the age of fourteen are provided with respectable situations.

The chapel, dedicated to St. John the Baptist, called Little St. John’s,
occupies the south wing of this building; it was formerly an hospital, or
sanctuary, and endowed with great privileges.  It is extra-parochial, and
a perpetual curacy is in the gift of the Corporation.  The Rev. William
Clarke is the present curate.  The hospital is of great antiquity, having
been founded by Randal, Earl of Chester, for a master, three chaplains,
and thirteen citizens of Chester, being either “poor or sillie, or poor
or feeble persons.”  The mastership was granted in the ninth year of
Edward Second to the prior of Birkenhead.

The chapel and hospital being destroyed during the civil wars, were
rebuilt by Colonel Roger Whitley, to whom King Charles Second granted the
hospital estate for his life and twenty years after.  When the city
charter was renewed in 1686, the reversions were granted to the mayor and
citizens for ever, as trustees for the hospital.  The Corporation
obtained possession in 1703, and have since exercised the right of
presentation.  In the time of King Henry VIII. it consisted of a chaplain
and six poor brethren; and had lands and profits to the amount of £28
10s. 4d.  In later days there were in the Chapel-yard six almshouses for
widows, who were each allowed £1 6s. 8d. a year and some perquisites.  In
1801, Alderman Crewe bequeathed £30 per annum to be divided amongst them
in equal proportions.  Under an amended scheme, by order of the Court of
Chancery, in 1852, the almshouses were rebuilt, and provision is now made
for thirteen “poor and impotent persons of both sexes,” to each of whom
the sum of £26 a year, by weekly payments of 10s., is given.  They have
free occupation of the houses, and £30 per annum.  Alderman Crewe’s
legacy is expended for their benefit in coals and other articles of
domestic comfort.

Proceeding on our circuit, we next reach a curious square building called
MORGAN’S MOUNT, a platform on the right, accessible by a flight of steps,
underneath which is a sort of chamber, apparently one of the stations for
a sentinel.  From the summit we have a wide-spreading and enchanting
prospect, exhibiting the windings of the Dee to its estuary; Flint
Castle; the Jubilee Column, on Moel Fammau; the Lighthouse, at the point
of Ayr; the beautiful range of the Clwyddian hills; and the church and
castle of Hawarden.  On the right, a very excellent view is presented of
the



TRAINING COLLEGE,


which was erected from a design and under the superintendence of Messrs.
J. C. and G. Buckler, of London, at an estimated cost of £10,000, raised
by public subscription, assisted by a grant from Government, and was
completed in September, 1842.  The institution is under the presidency of
the Lord Bishop of the diocese, and has the sanction of the Deans and
Chapters of Chester and Manchester.  The object it seeks to promote is,
the supply of the parochial schools of the Diocese of Chester with
masters well qualified by a sound religious and scientific training, for
the discharge of their important duties.  Hitherto, it has nobly
sustained its purpose, and, by regularly sending forth men whose minds
have been brought under thorough discipline, and well furnished with
general knowledge and science, is doing very much towards the elevation
of parochial education in the diocese.  The college is under the able
direction of the Rev. Arthur Rigg, M.A., of Christ’s College, Cambridge.
A handsome chapel is attached to the college.

In the Minutes of the Committee of Council on Education for 1850, there
are the following remarks, by the Rev. Henry Moseley, upon the Chester
Training College:—

    “I have to bear the same testimony as heretofore to the excellent
    discipline of the Institution; to the great order that pervades it;
    and to the judicious arrangements made in respect to the industrial
    training of the students, the industry, cheerfulness, and activity
    with which these labours are pursued, in the intervals of study, is
    most pleasing to contemplate.  I know no other training school which,
    in respect to these things, appears to me superior to this; and I
    attach to them, in a moral point of view, the first importance.  Nor
    do I know any other in which the buildings appear to me better
    adapted to the use of a training school, or in which those minor
    arrangements, on which the domestic comfort of the inmates and the
    good order of the household depend, are more carefully observed.”

A few paces further on is an ancient tower, formerly called the _Goblin’s
Tower_, but now known by the name of PEMBERTON’S PARLOUR.  Being in a
ruinous condition, part of it was taken down in 1702, and the remainder
renovated and repaired.  On the front was some excellent carved work in
stone, and the names of the then Mayor (the Earl of Derby) and the other
corporate officers of the year in which the repairs were made; but in
consequence of the stone being of a soft and friable nature, and from
other causes, both the inscription and the carved work are now almost
obliterated.  The inscription, so far as it is legible, is as follows:—

    “ * * * year of the glorious reign of Queen Anne divers wide breaches
    in these walls were rebuilt, and other decays therein were repaired;
    2,000 yards of the pavement were new flagged or paved, and the whole
    repaired, regulated, and adorned, at the expense of £1,000 and
    upwards.  Thomas Hand, Esq., Mayor, 1701.  The Right Honourable
    William, Earl of Derby, Mayor, 1702, who died in his Mayoralty.”

On the left is a large field, anciently called _Barrow Field_, which was
used by the Roman soldiers for their military exercises; a vast number of
bodies were buried here at one of the periods when the plague raged so
severely in the city.

           [Picture: Water Tower & Museum, City Walls, Chester]

Continuing our route westward, we next come to



THE WATER TOWER,


an ancient fortress, erected for the purpose of repelling the approach of
maritime foes, for it appears that formerly the river flowed under this
part of the walls, so that vessels could sail close by the Tower.  At
high tide, the whole of the land on which are now situated Crane-street
and the neighbourhood, was covered with water.  At the south angle of the
walls is an old square tower, anciently called _Bonwaldesthorne’s Tower_,
from which is an embattled passage to the Water Tower, which was built in
1322, by contract for £100, by John Helpstone, a mason.  The dimensions
were 24 yards in height, and 10½ yards in diameter.  It had openings for
cannon and rings in the walls, to which ships were formerly moored.  This
noble bulwark is suggestive of reflections of deep historic interest; for
at the siege of Chester by the Republican army, this place was bombarded
from the farm-house called Brewer’s Hall, on the opposite side of the
river, but without success.  Many a gallant sentinel has here kept loyal
watch against the approach of the enemy.  Happily, our age needs not
these ancient fortifications for the warlike purpose to which they were
originally devoted, and as an exhibition of the genius of the thirteenth
and nineteenth centuries in happy contrast, this tower, built for war, is
now occupied as a



MUSEUM OF THE MECHANICS’ INSTITUTION,


and is devoted to the more beneficent object of science and general
improvement.  Although the Museum is but of recent origin, the zeal and
liberality of its supporters have already well furnished it with valuable
relies, which will interest the antiquary, and other curiosities of more
modern date, which afford gratification to all.  The munificent
liberality of William Wardell, Esq., a devoted friend to every enterprise
which contemplates the social and intellectual advancement of the
citizens, enables us to point out an attractive object in the



CAMERA OBSCURA,


which is situated on the upper part of the tower.  We can promise the
reader much amusement from this excellent instrument, which will furnish
him with a most charming prospect of the diversified and lovely scenery
of the district.  On the top of the tower is fixed a very good telescope
by Dollond, which commands a most extensive and magnificent view.  If the
day be favourable, and the atmosphere clear, we can stretch our gaze over
a wide and truly grand range of objects, embracing the Great Ormshead at
Llandudno in Carnarvonshire, the Wrekin in Shropshire, Moel Fammau and
the Welsh Hills, towering aloft in their tranquil majesty.  Across the
river is Brewer’s Hall, which we have mentioned, where Cromwell’s army
erected a battery, for the purpose of destroying this tower, “but which
had no great effect;” close by is the Railway Viaduct of forty-seven
arches, and the Bridge crossing the Dee on cast-iron girders; the whole
scene forming an exceedingly fine panorama.

At the foot of the flight of steps close by are the City Baths and
Wash-houses.  The swimming bath is very capacious, and the necessary
adjuncts most complete: there are also private and shower baths.

We now resume our walk; and, proceeding southwards from the Water Tower,
on the left, is



THE INFIRMARY;


a handsome brick building, founded by Dr. William Stratford, who
bequeathed £300 to the charity.  It was opened on the 17th March, 1761.
It is capable of containing 100 beds, with commodious offices, and
excellent accommodation for its respective officers.  The north part of
the building is exclusively devoted to a fever ward.  This asylum for the
afflicted is liberally supported by voluntary subscriptions.  Donors of
twenty guineas, and subscribers of two guineas per annum, are governors,
with the privilege of recommending two in-patients, and six out-door
patients annually.

The inmates receive the most humane and skilful attention from the
medical staff, which consists of Honorary Physicians and Surgeons, a
Resident Surgeon, and an Assistant.

The number of patients admitted during the year 1857 were—

In-patients                                                        547
Home-patients                                                    1,120
Out-patients                                                     2,393
The total number since the foundation of the                  230,075.
institution,

Of all the charitable institutions which do honour to the benevolence of
the city, the Infirmary ranks the first in beneficial and important
operations, and eminently deserves the sympathy and support of the
public.

The next large building close by is



THE CITY GAOL,


which also includes the HOUSE OF CORRECTION; both are under the
superintendence of a committee of the Town Council.  The Gaol is in the
western part of the building, with a good Doric entrance.  Over the front
entrance, within the iron railing, the condemned criminals are executed.
The entrance to the House of Correction is at the east end, and is also
of stone.  Each of these establishments has four courts, with cells and
day rooms adjoining; and both are under the government of one gaoler and
a male and female assistant.  There is a chapel common to both
establishments.  The chaplain is appointed by the Corporation.  In
consequence of the escapes the prisoners have succeeded in making from
time to time, many improvements have been made in the internal
arrangements of the prison, since it was first built, respecting the
classification of prisoners and other matters; and the outworks of the
building have received some important additions to ensure their greater
security.  A little further on to the left is Stanley-place, a pleasant,
open square of modern residences, leading to the Linen Hall Cheese Mart,
which is well supplied at the fairs, held six times during the year, with
Cheese from the dairies of Cheshire and North Wales.

We now ascend a handsome gateway called



THE WATERGATE,


the custody of which formerly belonged to the Earls of Derby, who held a
valuable river jurisdiction, in executing the mayor’s warrants on the
Dee, which formerly flowed close underneath.  It was purchased from the
Derby family by the Corporation in 1778, taken down in 1788, and the
present structure erected in 1789, the expense being defrayed out of the
murage duties fund.  It consists of a wide and lofty arch, thrown over
the Watergate-street, where a rapid descent adds much to its apparent
elevation.  The west side bears the following inscription:—

              IN THE XXIX. YEAR OF THE REIGN OF GEO. III. IN THE
            MAYORALTY OF JOHN HALLWOOD, AND JOHN LEIGH, ESQUIRES,
                            THIS GATE WAS ERECTED.

            THOMAS COTGREAVE, EDWARD BURROWS, ESQUIRES, MURENGERS.

The view from the summit of this gate is very extensive, the objects
immediately surrounding adding much to the pleasure of the scene.  On the
opposite bank of the river Dee is Curzon Park, with its beautiful villa
residences.  On the left is Grosvenor Bridge, with its far-famed noble
arch, the widest arch of masonry in the world; a little beyond may be
seen the grand lodge entrance to Eaton Park, erected at the cost of
£14,000, the _toute ensemble_ forming a most charming picture.  The site
of the present Crane-street and the parts adjacent were formerly under
water.

Immediately below is the beautiful and spacious meadow called the



ROODEYE.


It contains about eighty-four statute acres of land, and is let by the
Corporation as a pasture for cattle.  It was once the arena for ancient
sports, and the city games and gymnastics were celebrated here,
respecting which there are many curious records extant.  Of these,
however, the horse races alone remain, which continue to be held in the
first week of May, this Spring meeting being considered one of the most
important and interesting illustrations of the national sports of the
turf.  The course is little more than a mile, and affords the spectators
the singular advantage of seeing the horses during the whole race.  The
Earl of Chester’s Regiment of Yeomanry Cavalry assembles annually on the
Roodeye for exercise.

The antiquity of the Chester races appears from the following extract
from the collection of the late Mr. Nicholls of Chorlton, to whose
researches the authors of the ‘History of Cheshire’ are much indebted.
The MS. from which this is extracted is entitled,

    “_Certayne collections of anciante times_, _concerning the anciante
    and famous cittie of Chester_, _collected by that Reverend Man of
    God_, _Mr. Robert Rogers_, _bachelor of divinitie_, _archdeacon of
    Chester_, _parsone of Gooseworth_, _and prebande in the Cathedral of
    Chester_, _being put in scattered notes_, _and by his son reduced
    into these chapters following_:—

     “OF ST. GEORGE’S RACE, OF LATE TIME INVENTED, AND WHEN ALTERED.

    “In A.D. 1609, Mr. William Lester, mercer, beinge mayor of Chester,
    one Mr. Robert Amerye, ironmonger, sometime sheriffe of Chester (A.D.
    1608), he, with the assent of the mayor and cittie, at his own coste
    chiefly, as I conceive chiefly, caused three silver cupps, of goode
    value, to be made, the which saide silver cupps were, upon St.
    George’s daye, for ever to be thus disposed: all gentlemen that would
    bringe their horses to the Rood-dee that daye, and there run, that
    horse which with speede did over-rune the reste, shoulde have the
    beste cuppe there presently delivered, and that horse which came
    seconde, next the firste, before the reste, had the seconde cuppe
    there also delivered; and for the thirde cuppe, it was to be run for
    at the ringe, by any gentleman that woulde rune for the same, upon
    the said Rood-dee, and upon St. George’s daye; being thus decreed,
    that every horse putt in soe much monie as made the value of the
    cupps or bells, and had the money, which horses did winne the same,
    and the use of the cupps, till that day twelve month, beinge in bonde
    to deliver in the cupps that daye; soe also for the cuppe for the
    ringe, which was yearly continued accordingly, until the yeare of our
    Lord 1623; John Brereton, inn-holder, beinge mayor of Chester, he
    altered the same after this manner, and caused the three cupps to be
    sould, and caused more money to be gathered and added, soe that the
    intereste thereof would make one faire silver cuppe, of the value of
    £8 as I suppose, it maye be more worth, and the race to be altered,
    viz., from beyonde the New Tower a great distance, and soe to rune
    five times from that place rownd about the Rood-dee, and he that
    overcame all the reste the last course, to have the cuppe freely for
    ever, then and there delivered, which is continued to this daye.  But
    here I must not omit the charge, and the solemnitie made the first of
    St. George’s daye; he had a poet, one Mr. Davies, who made speeches
    and poeticale verses, which were delivered at the high crosse, before
    the mayor and aldermen, with shews of his invention, which booke was
    imprinted and presented to that famous Prince Henry, eldest sonne to
    the blessed King James, of famous memorie.  Alsoe he caused a man to
    go upon the spire of St. Peter’s steeple in Chester, and by the fane,
    at the same tyme he sounded the drum, and displayed a banner upon the
    top of the same spire.  And this was the original of St. George’s
    race with the change thereof, as it is now used.”

                       [Picture: Chester Cemetery]

On the west side of the Roodeye stands



THE HOUSE OF INDUSTRY,


built by the Corporation in 1757, as a refuge for age and indigence.
Warm and cold baths are established for the use of the inmates, whose
comfort is most studiously consulted and provided for.  The pleasant row
of houses on the right of the Roodeye is called Paradise-row, the site of
which, as appears by an ancient map, was once in the bed of the river.

Soon after passing the Watergate, on the left, there is an opening to the
city, called Smith’s-walk, at the bottom of which stands a large house,
on the site of which formerly stood the Priory of White Friars or
Carmelites.

On the north side of the open field on the left is a pleasant mansion,
now the Rectory house of St. Bridget’s parish, but formerly the residence
of the late Thomas Harrison, Esq., the celebrated architect, who has
immortalized his genius in some of the finest works of which Chester can
boast.  Near this spot once stood a convent of Benedictine nuns,
dedicated to St. Mary.  It was suppressed, with the other lesser
monasteries, in 1537, and no vestige of the ancient building now remains.

Before proceeding further on our circuit round the walls, we recommend
the visitor to turn off to the right on the road, for the purpose of
inspecting the



NEW CEMETERY, near the Grosvenor Bridge.


It is beautifully laid out, and arranged with admirable taste, and was
rendered necessary by the overcrowded state of the parochial burial
grounds.  Opposite the Cemetery gates is a suspension bridge, for foot
passengers, to Curzon Park, whence we have a fine panoramic view of
Chester.

We now retrace our steps to survey that interesting structure,



THE CASTLE.


We have no precise authority whereby to ascertain the date of the
foundation of Chester Castle.  Some think there is good reason to believe
it to be of Roman origin, and of equal antiquity with the City Walls.
Others have fixed the date of its erection A.D. 1069, by William the
Conqueror; but there are some considerations which seem to point to an
earlier period than this.  It is stated by Camden to have been _repaired_
by Hugh Lupus, and additional fortifications erected by the Norman Earls
his successors.  It was certainly the palace of the local monarchs, as
well as their chief stronghold, and retained much of this mixed character
until modern alterations were made.  Pennant describes the Castle, as it
formerly stood, as being composed of two parts, an upper and a lower,
each with a strong gate, defended by a round bastion on each side, with a
ditch and draw-bridges.

In 1237, upon the death of John Scott, the last earl of the Norman line,
the Commissioners of Henry III. seized Chester Castle for the King.

In 1265 James De Aldithley and Urian De St. Pierre, at the head of the
citizens of Chester, besieged Luke De Taney, King’s Justice, in the
Castle, which held out for ten weeks, when, upon receiving intelligence
of the battle of Evesham, he surrendered.

Henry of Lancaster (afterwards Henry IV.), having taken up arms against
Richard II. in 1399, mustered his army upon the bank of the Dee, under
the walls of Chester, and Sir Piers Legh of Lyme, an adherent of Richard,
was beheaded, and his head set upon the top of the highest tower in the
Castle.  Shortly afterwards, the unfortunate Richard and the Earl of
Salisbury were brought prisoners to Chester, mounted (says Hall) “upon
two little nagges, not worth forty franks,” when the King was delivered
“to the Duke of Gloucester’s sonne and the Earl of Arundell’s sonne, that
loved him but a little, for he had put their fathers to death, who led
him strait to the castell.”

In 1403 Henry Percy, surnamed Hotspur, visited Chester on his way to the
fatal field of Shrewsbury, and caused proclamation to be made, that King
Richard was yet alive, and a prisoner in Chester Castle, where he might
be seen.

Eleanor, Duchess of Gloucester, wife of the _Good Duke Humphrey_, was
confined for several months in Chester Castle, in 1447, previous to her
removal to the Isle of Man, under a sentence of perpetual imprisonment,
on a charge of “practising the King’s death.”

Here, in 1651, the Puritans, in their peculiar phraseology, “_sought the
Lord_,” by trying and condemning to death the gallant and patriotic Earl
of Derby, Sir Timothy Featherstonehaugh, and Captain Benbow.  According
to Whitlocke, the Earl “attempted to escape, and was let down by a rope
from the leads of his chamber; but some hearing a noise, made after him,
and he was retaken upon Dee bank.”

The ancient structure was taken down at the close of the last century,
and the present edifice erected on its site.

The principal entrance is through a handsome portico of Grecian Doric
architecture.  It is 103 feet by 35, and consists of a centre and two
wings connected by covered passages.  The ten fluted columns, which
compose the peristyle in the centre, are each cut out of a single block
of stone.  It is situated in the centre of a semicircular sunk fence or
foss, 13 feet deep, and 390 feet in diameter, cased with hewn stone,
surmounted with stone pedestals at equal distances, and the spaces filled
with handsome iron rails, forming the north-west boundary of the
esplanade.

On the western side of the esplanade is the Armoury, capable of
containing between 30,000 and 40,000 stand of arms.  This is well worthy
the inspection of strangers, who cannot fail to be struck with the
excellent state in which the military stores are kept, and the tasteful
arrangement of the arms.

Within the gate at the east end of this range of buildings is the
guard-house, behind which is a venerable tower, called _Julius
Agricola’s_, or _Cæsar’s_, which is still entire, and partly occupied as
a magazine.  Within this tower is a curious chapel, mentioned in the
tax-book of Henry VIII. as the chantry “_infra Castrum Cestriæ_” and
yielding as its tenth 10s. 8d.  It is an upper chamber, about 19 feet by
16, and 16 feet in height.  The roof, which is vaulted and groined, is of
stone.  On one side is a plain pointed recess in the wall, the back of
which appears to have been ornamented with paintings, and was probably
the altar.  James II. heard mass in this chapel.



THE GAOL AND COUNTY HALL.


The principal entrance to the Shire Hall is through a portico of twelve
columns in double rows, 22 feet high, and 3 feet 1½ inches in diameter,
each formed of a single stone.  The ceiling, roof, and covering, are also
of stone.  The hall is of a semicircular form, measuring 80 feet by 50,
including the judgment-seat, and 44 feet high, and is lighted from above.
The ceiling is a semi-dome, boldly caissoned with ventilators opening to
the roof, in the shape of ornamental roses.  It is supported by a row of
twelve Ionic columns, each composed of a single stone, from the bases of
which there is a gradual descent by a flight of circular steps to the
bar, which enables every one in the body of the court to have a perfect
view of the judges, counsel, prisoners, and witnesses.  There is a
subterraneous passage from the dock to the prison, which affords both
facility and safety in the removal of the prisoners.

On the right of the entrance to the County Hall are the Grand Jury Room
and the Prothonotary’s Offices.  In a small room on the ground floor is
the model of the Grosvenor Bridge, and there are full length portraits of
William III., Charles II., George I., George II., and Frederick, Prince
of Wales.

On the left is the entrance to the County Gaol, which may vie in every
respect with any other establishment of the sort in the kingdom.  It is
built upon two levels.  On the east side of the range of buildings on the
upper level is the Deputy-Governor’s house; adjoining are the day and
sleeping rooms of the male debtors, with a large and commodious yard,
commanding a view of the surrounding country; and in an extensive wing
are the convicts’ cells, apartments for the female debtors and prisoners,
with the matron’s house and hospital.  In the centre, projecting beyond
the level, and of a semicircular form, so as to command a view of the
court yards, &c., are the gaoler’s or governor’s apartments.  Underneath
the governor’s apartments, and of the same form, is the chapel, which has
lately been rebuilt and much improved.  It is situate between the upper
and lower level, and so contrived as to receive the debtors and criminals
into different compartments, from their respective court yards.  Divine
service is performed in the chapel every morning during the week, and
twice every Sunday.  The Rev. J. M. Kilner is the present chaplain, who
is most indefatigable in the discharge of his duties.  On the lower
level, under the jailor’s house, are the felons’ yards, five in number.
They are spacious and airy, and each contains a pump and trough.  A sort
of area or passage surrounds these yards, and beyond that is the outside
wall, built of immense blocks of stone, and conveying at once the idea of
security and solidity.  Nothing can exceed the excellent discipline and
general arrangement of the prisoners.  A large proportion of the
prisoners are profitably employed, under the superintendence of a
task-master.  They are chiefly engaged in calico, rug, and carpet
weaving, shoe-making, and basket-making.  The greater part of the
articles of clothing and bed furniture used within the walls are
manufactured by them; and the store-room presents the appearance of a
complete depository of useful articles for the prison, of almost every
description.

There is also a commodious schoolroom, which is efficiently
superintended.  Everything relating to the internal management of this
prison is complete in each department, and reflects the highest credit on
the governor, Mr. Dunstan.

Previous to the new erections, on the east side of the lower court stood
the ancient Shire Hall, in which the courts of justice for the county
used to be held.  It was a magnificent building, nearly 90 feet in
length, and 45 in breadth; the height very lofty, and worthy the state
apartment of the first Norman Earl, Hugh Lupus, who required a hall
suitable to the greatness of his hospitality.  Adjoining to this hall was
the Court of Exchequer, or Court of Chancery, of the county palatine of
Chester.  It was the Parliament House of the little kings of the
palatinate, and had neat gothic seats for the abbot and eight barons.

The east side of the esplanade is appropriated to Barracks, which contain
excellent and spacious accommodations.  Behind the Barracks is the
Provost, with an enclosed yard.  It is no longer employed for this
purpose, having been, some time since, converted into an armoury for
pensioners, military library and reading-room, &c.  This wing, and the
opposite one on the west side of the esplanade, were built at the joint
expense of the Crown and the County Palatine.

Proceeding through the gate at the east end, we come to



THE SESSIONS HOUSE,


a neat and commodious edifice, with a tolerably spacious court,
magistrates’ and grand jury rooms, and a robing room for counsel on the
ground floor; and upstairs are the Clerk of the Peace’s record rooms and
other offices.

Before leaving the Castle yard, the attention of the visitor will
naturally be attracted by memorials of the Crimean war, in the form of
two Russian guns, mounted on either side of the grand entrance, under a
portico, enclosed with iron railings.  On each of these formidable pieces
of ordnance is inscribed the following historical memorandum:

                                   THIS GUN
                     WAS CAPTURED BY THE ALLIED ARMIES OF
                    ENGLAND, FRANCE, TURKEY, AND SARDINIA,
                                AT SEVASTOPOL,
                      ON THE 8TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 1855,
                               AND PRESENTED BY
                                 HER MAJESTY
                         TO THE CITIZENS OF CHESTER,
                   IN COMMEMORATION OF THAT ARDUOUS SIEGE.
                               VICTORIA REGINA.

Having completed our view of the Castle, we return to continue our walk,
proceeding along the walls until we reach the boundary of the Castle,
where the tourist will have a fine view of the



GROSVENOR BRIDGE.


This noble work of art, which is unequalled in the history of
bridge-building, crosses the Dee at the south-east angle of the Roodeye,
and is approached by a new road from the centre of Bridge-street, which
passes by the Castle esplanade, proceeds across the City Walls, and then,
by an immense embankment, thrown over a deep valley, to the foot of the
bridge.  The bridge consists of one main stone arch, with a small dry
arch or towing path on each side, by which the land communication is
preserved on both sides of the river.  The cost of erection was £36,000.

The great distinguishing feature of this edifice is the unparalleled
width of the chord or span of the main arch, which is of greater extent
than that of any other known to have been constructed.  Of its dimensions
the following is an accurate delineation:—The span of the arch, _two
hundred feet_. {40}  Height of the arch from the springing line, 40 feet.
Dimensions of the main abutments, 48 feet wide by 40, with a dry arch as
a towing path at each side, 20 feet wide, flanked with immense wing
walls, to support the embankment.  The whole length of the roadway, 340
feet.  Width of the bridge from outside the parapet walls, 35 feet 6
inches, divided thus: carriage road, 24 feet; the two causeways, 9 feet;
thickness of the parapet walls, 2 feet 6 inches.  Altitude from the top
of the parapet wall to the river at low-water mark, 66 feet 6 inches.
The architectural plan of this bridge was furnished by the late Thomas
Harrison, Esq.; contractor and builder, Mr. James Trubshaw, of
Staffordshire; surveyor, Mr. Jesse Hartley, of Liverpool.  The first
stone was laid on the 1st October, 1827, by the late Marquis of
Westminster, and a specimen of each of the current coins of the realm
deposited therein; and was formally opened in October, 1832, by her Royal
Highness the Princess Victoria (her present Most Gracious Majesty), on
occasion of her visit, and that of her Royal mother, the Duchess of Kent,
to Eaton Hall.  As a compliment to her noble host, at the request of the
commissioners, the bridge was named “Grosvenor Bridge,” by the young
Princess.  It was opened to the public in December, 1833.

It was opposite to this part of the Walls that King Edgar’s palace was
situated, from which he was rowed up the river to St. John’s Priory, by
eight tributary princes, in 971.

Within seventy yards of the bridge formerly stood an ancient Roman
gateway in the walls, called the SHIPGATE, or _Hole in the Wall_, at one
time the only entrance into Chester from Handbridge.  It was taken down
some years ago, and is now in the possession of Thomas Finchett Maddock,
Esq.  It forms a perfect specimen of Roman masonry, originally 20 feet in
height by 16 in breadth.  Pennant remarks, “that this postern seems
originally to have been designed for the common passage over the Dee into
the country of the Ordovices, either by means of a boat at high water, or
by a ford at low, the river here being remarkably shallow.”  Opposite the
Shipgate is a ford in the river leading through to a field on the
Handbridge side, called _Edgar’s Field_, in which stands the ancient
sculpture of the _Diva Armigera_ PALLAS, already mentioned under the head
of “ROMAN ANTIQUITIES,” in a former part of this work.

Pursuing our walk, we next arrive at



THE BRIDGEGATE,


a handsome arch gateway, having two posterns, erected in 1782, at the
expense of the Corporation.  On the tablet over the western postern is
the following inscription:—

               THIS GATE WAS BEGUN APRIL, MDCCLXXXII., PATISON
               ELLAMES, ESQ., MAYOR, AND FINISHED DECEMBER THE
                   SAME YEAR, THOMAS PATISON, ESQ., MAYOR.

            THOS. COTGREAVE, ESQ., HENRY HESKETH, ESQ., MURENGERS.

                          JOSEPH TURNER, ARCHITECT.

On another tablet, on the east side,—

                  THIS GATE, HAVING BEEN LONG INCONVENIENT,
                        WAS TAKEN DOWN A.D. MDCCLXXXI.

    JOSEPH SNOW, ESQ., MAYOR.

    THOS. AMERY, HENRY HEGG, TREASURERS.

From the top of this gateway the banks of the Dee, with the bridge, and
suburbs of Handbridge, present a lively and striking appearance, which at
low water is increased by the rapid falling of the stream over the
causeway across the river immediately above the bridge.  In the distance
may be seen Beeston Castle, on its lofty summit; and the successive
ranges of Bucklow and Peckforton Hills form a beautiful background to the
landscape.

A little southward stands



THE OLD BRIDGE,


which is of considerable antiquity.  A wooden bridge was erected on the
same spot by the Mercian Princess Ethelfleda, early in the tenth century;
but from the ‘Chronicle of Chester Abbey,’ we learn that in 1227 “pons
Cestriæ totus cecidit;” and that in 1279 “mare erupit, pontem Cestriæ
confregit et asportavit.”  The wooden bridge being thus disposed of, we
next find from the ‘Red Book of St. Werburgh,’ that “in 1280 the King
(Edward I.) compelled the citizens of Chester to rebuild Dee Bridge at
their own charge, contrary to the privileges which had been granted to
them.”  In 1500, the south end of the Bridge, having fallen into decay,
was rebuilt, and a tower for its defence added at the entrance into
Handbridge, which was taken down about sixty years ago.  In 1826 the
Bridge was widened to the extent of seven feet, by the addition of a
flagged footpath, on the east side, bounded towards the river by a good
iron railing, the projection supported by two courses of corbels.

It consists of seven irregular arches, and when viewed from the west,
presents an appearance of venerable antiquity; but on the east it no
longer holds out that recommendation to the eye of the observer, modern
alterations having left nothing on that side to render it worthy of
notice.

At the north end of the Bridge stand the



DEE MILLS,


used for the grinding of corn.  Although the date of the first erection
of mills on this spot cannot now be ascertained, yet there is evidence of
their having been there from remote antiquity.  Sir Howell-y-Fwyall
obtained a grant of them from Edward III. in reward for his services at
the battle of Poictiers.  In the fifth of Edward VI. they were granted by
the Crown to Sir Richard Cotton, in exchange for the manors of Bourne and
Moreton, in Lincolnshire; and by his son George they were granted in fee
farm to Edmund Gamul, at a yearly rent of £100.  Gamul expended a large
sum in repairing the causeway originally erected by Hugh Lupus.  In 1646
an order of Parliament was issued, that the mills and causeway should be
destroyed, as an obstruction to trade; but this order, issued by the
Puritans then in power, probably with no other view than to obtain a
_composition_ from the proprietor, was never complied with.  On the
alienation of the Gamul property, the greater part of the mills fell into
the hands of Mr. Edward Wrench, in whose successor the property is now
vested.  The Dee Mills have been twice destroyed by fire within the last
sixty years.  The first conflagration broke out about twelve at night, of
Saturday, September 26, 1789; the second, about the same hour of Saturday
night, March 6, 1819; on which latter occasion the progress of the flames
was so rapid, that the whole of the premises, with the exception of part
of the outward wall, were destroyed in less than six hours.  The loss
sustained was upwards of £40,000.  A third fire took place in January,
1847, which destroyed the whole of one of the mills.

We shall now proceed to notice



THE OLD BRIDGEGATE,


which appears to have been of equal antiquity with the bridge itself, for
it is shown by documents in the possession of the Earl of Shrewsbury,
that Randle, Earl of Chester, confirmed a gift of his Countess to Poyns,
her servant, of the custody of this gate.  And another deed, of the
thirteenth century, preserved among the same documents, records, “quod
ego Ricardus Bagoth de Cestr: dedi et omnino quietam clamavi Philippo
clerico civi Cestr: _totum jus meum in porta pontis Cestr_: cum omnibus
pertinentijs suis.”  From Philip the clerk the custody of this gate
passed to the family of Raby, one of whom, Philip de Raby, in the
fourteenth century, had also the keeping of the Earl’s garden at the
Castle, for which service he received the fruit of a tree called “a
_restynge tre_,” and whatever remained on the other trees after the first
shaking, under the _reddendo_ of furnishing the Earl’s household with
colewort from Michaelmas to Lent, and with leeks during Lent.  From the
Rabys the custody of the Bridgegate passed to the Norrises of Speke, in
Lancashire, and the Troutbecks.  In 1624 the Corporation purchased the
moiety belonging to the Norrises; and in 1660 they also purchased the
other moiety from the Earl of Shrewsbury, representative of the
Troutbecks, the Earl reserving to himself, during his visits to Chester,
the use of a suite of apartments in a house near the gate.

The Old Gate consisted of an arched gateway, flanked with two strong
round towers, on one of which was erected a lofty octagonal tower,
containing a cistern for supplying the city with water, called Tyrer’s
Water Works, concerning which Webb says, “The Bridgegate hath of late
been greatly beautified by a seemly water-work of stone, built
steeple-wise, by the ingenious industry and charge of a late worthy
member of the city, John Tyrer, gent., and hath served ever since to
great use, for the conveying of the river water from the cistern, in the
top of that work, to the citizens’ houses in almost all the parts of the
city, in pipes of lead and wood, _to their no small contentment and
commodity_.”  The whole fabric was taken down in 1781.

Proceeding eastward, a most pleasing view of the Dee, of considerable
extent, is presented, with delightful cottage and villa residences on the
Boughton bank, and in a pleasant suburb called “Queen’s Park,” the
elegant suspension bridge to which forms a novel feature in the
landscape.  On the left of the river is a cool and shady walk, called
_The Groves_, where there are excellent pleasure boats for the
accommodation of those who enjoy a sail or a pull up the river.  We have
here a very good view of St. John’s Church on the right, a venerable
pile, containing some curious and interesting specimens of Norman
architecture.

Within about fifty yards of the Recorder’s steps, the wall forms an angle
to the northward.  Here we ascend six flights of steps, consisting of
three steps each, called the _Wishing Steps_, erected in 1785, at the top
of which stood an ancient Watch Tower, which had formerly an apartment
with a stone seat on one side, and windows commanding a view of the river
and adjacent country.  This room was removed in 1826.

We next arrive at



THE NEWGATE,


a plain arched gateway, forming a communication betwixt Newgate-street
and Pepper-street within the Walls, and St. John’s-street, Dee-lane, &c.,
without.  On the spot now occupied by this gate, formerly stood a
postern, called _Wolf’s Gate_, or _Pepper Gate_.  Of this postern, Fuller
says, that in the sixteenth century “the Mayor of the city had his
daughter, as she was playing at ball with other maidens in Pepper-street,
stolen away by a young man through the same gate, whereupon he caused it
to be shut up,” which gave rise to the saying, “When the daughter is
stolen, shut Pepper Gate.”  The postern was removed and the Newgate
erected in 1608.  From a Journal of the Siege of Chester, in King’s ‘Vale
Royal,’ it appears that on the 29th September, 1645, “the besiegers made
a breach in the walls near to the Newgate, by the battery of 150 cannon
shot, and at midnight made a sharp assault upon the breach.  They
likewise attempted to mount the walls with scaling ladders, but some
officers and several soldiers were hauled in over the walls; some of the
ladders, too, were dragged over, and many of the assailants thrown down
and killed, and the rest forced to give over the attack.”

A short way further to the eastward, after passing the scanty remains of
an old tower abutting from the Walls, called _Thimbleby’s Tower_, we
arrive at a flight of steps leading to the Wesleyan Methodist Chapel in
St. John’s-street, the access to which from this quarter was made under
the sanction of the Corporation.  This handsome and commodious place of
worship was erected in 1811.  Near to the chapel is a large and
commodious School-house, recently erected, capable of containing from 200
to 300 children, which is occupied during the week as a day school, and
is in a prosperous condition.

A few paces now brings us to



THE EASTGATE,


consisting of a wide and beautiful centre arch for the passage of
carriages, and two posterns for the safety and convenience of foot
passengers.  It was built at the sole expense of the late Marquis of
Westminster, whose arms, and those of the city, occupy the centre of the
principal arch.  On the 8th August, 1768, the south-west corner stone of
the Eastgate was laid by John Page, Esq., Provincial Grand Master,
attended by four regular lodges of Freemasons; and the north-west
corner-stone by the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen of Chester.  On the
east side, under the Grosvenor armorial bearings, is the following
inscription:—

                          ERECTED AT THE EXPENSE OF
                           RICHARD LORD GROSVENOR,
                                  MDCCLXIX.

And on the west side, under the city arms,

    BEGUN A.D. MDCCLXVIII, JOHN KELSALL,
    ESQ., MAYOR. FINISHED A.D. MDCCLXIX,
    CHAS. BOSWELL, ESQ., MAYOR.

From the summit of the gate there is a fine view of Eastgate-street,
within the walls, and Foregate, or Forest-street on the outside.  On a
market day it is truly spirit-stirring to observe the multitude beneath,
and listen to the “busy hum of men,” citizens and country folks, engaged
in buying and selling,—bringing in and carrying out,—the various
commodities which furnish forth the provision market of a county town.
On the same spot formerly stood



THE OLD EASTGATE,


removed in 1768, as too narrow and inconvenient for one of the principal
entrances to the city.  It consisted of a beautifully formed Gothic
archway, flanked by two massive octagonal embattled towers, connected by
a substantial building, two stories in height, over the gateway, the roof
of which was raised to a level with and embattled in the same manner as
the flanking towers to which it formed the centre.  From the bearings on
four shields which ornamented the front of this gate, it is conjectured
to have been erected during the reign of Edward III.

A Roman gateway appears to have occupied the same spot at a still earlier
period; for in pulling down the Old Eastgate in 1768, two wide circular
arches of Roman architecture were discovered within its workmanship.

With all due admiration for the spirit of useful improvement which
dictated the erection of the present Eastgate, we cannot avoid expressing
our regret that the old one no longer remains to gratify the eye of the
antiquary and the man of taste.  Although the present gate is undoubtedly
much better adapted for the entrance of carriages of all kinds, yet the
Cestrians of the last century, who remembered the glories of the old
structure, must have been but ill reconciled to its substitute.

Having thus completed the circuit of the Walls of Chester, as they at
present stand, it only remains to notice that there was formerly an outer
gate in Foregate-street, about half a mile from the Eastgate, called



THE BARS GATE,


which, being in a very dilapidated state, was removed as a nuisance in
1770.  An outwork, in connection with this gate, was raised previous to
the siege of Chester in 1643.  This outwork, consisting of a mud wall,
fortified with mounts and bastions, joined the City Wall at the New
Tower, from whence it stretched out to the north-east so far as to take
in Upper Northgate-street; then running eastward, encompassed all the
suburbs on the north of Foregate-street, until it approached Boughton,
when it turned southward, and proceeded in that direction across
Foregate-street at the Bars Gate, down Dee-lane, at the bottom of which
its course was terminated by the river.  This outwork withstood a violent
assault by the Puritans under Sir William Brereton, on the 18th July,
1643, wherein the assailants were forced to retire with great loss; but
on the 19th of September, 1645, it was surprised and carried by a night
assault of the enemy, under the command of General Louthian, and was
afterwards occupied by the Puritans as a circumvallation, while
prosecuting the siege of the city.

    “In perusing the foregoing sketch of our Walls, with the incidental
    notices of contiguous objects, it is presumed, that individuals most
    conversant with the localities of the city, will meet with several
    particulars, either to gratify their curiosity or add to their
    information.  And it may also be hoped, that should the account be
    read by those who are strangers to our ancient fortifications, and
    the peculiar attractions of Chester, it may excite a commendable
    inquisitiveness for a personal survey, at the same time that it may
    assist as a directory to their inquiries.  In whatever point of view
    these old ramparts are considered, they possess an imposing interest,
    and confer incalculable benefits.  To the invalid, the sedentary
    student, or the man of business, occupied during the day in his shop
    or counting-house; to the habitually indolent, who require excitement
    to necessary exercise—to all these, the promenade on Chester Walls
    has most inviting attractions, where they may breathe all the
    salubrious winds of heaven in a morning or an evening walk.  Here the
    enthusiastic antiquarian, who would climb mountains, ford rivers,
    explore the bowels of the earth, and, regardless of toil and the
    claims of nature, exhaust his strength in search of a piece of rusty
    cankered brass, or a scrap of Roman earthenware, can scarcely advance
    a dozen paces but the pavement on which he treads, or some contiguous
    object, forces upon his observation the relics of times of earliest
    date.  Nor can the philosophic moralist encompass our venerable walls
    without having his mind, comparing the splendid and gigantic works of
    antiquity with their present condition, strongly impressed with the
    mutations produced by the lapse of ages, and the perishing nature of
    all mundane greatness.

    “I shall conclude this branch of our history by citing the sentiments
    of a man well known to the republic of letters, regarding our ancient
    city, not indeed particularly as to her walls, but as to her general
    attractions.  His information, as a traveller, was varied and
    extensive, and his discernment and intellect strong and acute.  This
    gentleman, who was no other than Mr. Boswell, in a letter to Dr.
    Johnson, dated October 22, 1779, says, ‘Chester pleases me more than
    any town I ever saw.  I told a very pleasing young lady, niece to one
    of the prebendaries (Miss Letitia Barnston), at whose house I saw
    her, ‘I have come to Chester, Madam, I cannot tell how; and far less
    can I tell how to get away from it.’  Dr. Johnson in reply says, ‘In
    the place where you are there is much to be observed, and you will
    easily procure yourself skilful directors.’  In another letter, dated
    November 7, in the same year, Boswell remarks, ‘I was quite enchanted
    at Chester, so that I could with difficulty quit it.’” {48}

              [Picture: Watergate Street Row South, Chester]




CHAPTER IV.
A WALK THROUGH THE CITY.


IT is our purpose now to conduct the tourist through the city, that we
may point out, in detail, the various objects of interest which claim his
attentive inspection.  But before commencing our perambulations through
the principal streets, we will here introduce a few remarks on that
unique feature which constitutes the distinguishing attraction of
Chester, and has given it universal celebrity.



THE ROWS.


Very curious are these old arcades, which are as interesting to the
antiquarian as they are convenient for a quiet lounge to ladies and
others engaged in shopping.  They occupy the greatest part of both sides
of Eastgate-street, and the upper parts of both sides of Watergate-street
and Bridge-street.  Those in Northgate-street are more irregular, only
one side, commonly called Shoemakers’-row, being used as a regular
thoroughfare.  Their appearance, both interior and exterior, is extremely
singular.  They form a gallery, occupying the front floor of each house,
parallel with the streets below, and are approached by flights of steps,
placed at convenient distances, in addition to those by which they are
entered and quitted at each end.  The passenger walks over the shops on a
level with the street, and under the first floor of the dwelling-houses;
and thus two lines of shops are erected in one front.  The rows are kept
in excellent repair, and form the chief promenade of the citizens.  To
strangers they cannot fail to prove an object of curiosity.  The shops in
the rows are generally considered the best situations for retail traders;
but those on the southern side of Eastgate-street and the eastern side of
Bridge-street have a decided preference.  Shops let here at high rents,
and are in never-failing request; and there are no parts of the city
which have undergone such rapid or extensive improvements.

In the sixteenth century the rows appear not to have exceeded 6 feet in
height and 10 in width, with clumsy wooden rails towards the street, and
large oaken pillars, supporting transverse beams and brackets, on which
rested the houses over head, formed of wood and plaster, so far
overhanging the street, that in some places the upper floors of opposite
houses nearly met.  Nearly the whole of the buildings of this description
are now taken down; and in rebuilding care has been taken to raise and
widen the rows, and to place iron railings towards the street in place of
the wooden posts formerly used.  The shops in the rows present a very
different appearance to that of about sixty years ago; then, as Hemingway
says, “the fronts were all _open_ to the row in two or three
compartments, according to their size; and at night were closed by large
hanging shutters fixed on hinges, and fastened in the daytime by hooks to
the ceiling of the row.”  At present these rows are “capable of supplying
all the real demands of convenience and the artificial calls of luxury,
mental and corporeal, presenting a cluster of drapers, clothiers,
jewellers, booksellers, &c., as respectable as the kingdom can produce.”
{50}  The origin and cause of the rows has furnished matter for much
curious investigation; and many conflicting conjectures have been
propounded respecting them.  The subject is involved in much obscurity;
and, in the absence of any positive data, we are not able to take higher
ground than the probabilities of the case.  It has been alleged that they
were originally used as places of defence, from whence to annoy and
repulse the assaults of the enemy, who might gain entrance into the
streets beneath by surprising the gates, during those remote ages when
Chester was subject to the sudden incursions of the Welsh.  But against
this opinion it may be urged, that in no one of their attacks upon this
city did the Welsh ever force their way within the gates or walls; so
that these latter, being proved by experience to be a sufficient bulwark
against our foes, there existed no necessity for the erection of any
further defences.  There is irrefragable evidence that the _form_ of the
city is Roman, and that the _walls_ were the work of that people; and the
same reasons which justify these conclusions are not less cogent for
presuming that the construction of the streets are Roman also.  Pennant
appears to have arrived at this conclusion:—he says, “These rows appear
to me to have been the same with the ancient _vestibules_, and to have
been a form of building preserved from the time that the city was
possessed by the Romans.  They were built before the doors, midway
between the streets and the houses, and were the places where dependants
waited for the coming out of their patrons, and under which they might
walk away the tedious minutes of expectation.  Plautus, in the 3rd act of
his _Mostella_, describes both their station and use.  The shops beneath
the rows were the Cryptæ and Apothecæ, magazines for the various
necessaries of the owners of the houses.”

Ormerod says that some of these crypts exhibit specimens of vaulting
equal to the cloisters of our Cathedral.

Camden, in describing Chester, says, “The houses are very fair built, and
along the chief streets are galleries or walking places they call rows,
having shops on both sides, through which a man may walk dry from one end
to the other.”  And Shukeley, in his ‘Itinerary,’ in 1724, says, “The
rows or piazzas are singular through the whole town, giving shelter to
foot people.  I fancied it a remain of the _Roman porticoes_.”

In the oldest histories, descriptive of the city in some form or other,
the elevated rows and the shops beneath are recognized.

Tacitus, “in describing the process by which Roman manners diffused
themselves throughout Britain, and gradually completed the subjugation of
the country, speaks of the natives of Britain as acquiring a taste for
the two leading features in Roman civilization, ‘Porticus and
Balnea,’—the portico, in which they were delighted to stroll and sun
themselves; and the baths, which were their national luxury.  He mentions
these, and we cannot but be struck by the coincidence with things with
which we are all familiar—the _rows_ of our ancient city, and the
Hypocaust, which is still shown as the Roman bath.  We are hereby led to
infer, that the mode of construction which gives the character to our
city, originated in Roman habits.” {51}



PRINCIPAL STREETS.


Within the walls, the city is subdivided by four principal streets,
intersecting each other nearly at right angles at St. Peter’s Church,
which stands in the centre of the city.  These streets retain numerous
old timber buildings, which give them an unusual and quaint appearance,
and are wider in general than those of cities of equal antiquity.
Immediately in front of the church formerly stood the High Cross, which
was pulled down and defaced by the Parliamentarians, when they took
possession of the city in 1646.  The upper portion of this valuable
antiquity is still preserved in the grounds of Netherlegh House, though
some of the carved figures are a good deal injured.  Mr. Pennant is of
opinion that St. Peter’s Church, and a few houses to the north and west,
occupy the site of the _Roman Prætorium_, with its Court of Judicature
and Angulale, where prayers, sacrifices, and other religious rites were
wont to be performed.

Adjoining the Cross formerly stood that ignominious instrument of
punishment, called the _Pillory_.

Adjoining the south side of St. Peter’s Church stood the old Pentice,
where the magistrates performed their judicial duties, where the sheriffs
sat to determine civil causes, and where the Town-office was kept, until
the year 1803, when it was removed for the purpose of widening the road
into Northgate and Watergate streets, at that time extremely narrow and
dangerous.  The bench of magistrates was then removed to much more
commodious apartments in the Exchange.  At the corner of the east of
Bridge-street and the west of Eastgate-street, and near to the Cross,
there was formerly a small stone building, forming a basin at the top,
called the _Conduit_, to which water was formerly brought into the city
from St. Giles’s well at Boughton, and thence conveyed to different parts
of the city.

The Cross used formerly to be the scene of the barbarous sport of
bull-baiting, of which the following satirical sketch is given in an old
History of Chester:—

    “The Cross is famous for being the annual scene of exhibition of that
    _polite play_ called a bull-bait, where four or five of these _horned
    heroes_ are attended by several hundred lovers of that _rational
    amusement_.  Till within a few years, the _dramatis personæ_ of this
    _elegant scene_ included even magistracy itself, the mayor and
    corporation attending in their official habiliments, at the Pentice
    windows, not only to countenance the _diversions_ of the _ring_, but
    to participate in a sight of its _enjoyments_.  A proclamation was
    also made, by the crier of the court, with all the gravity and
    solemnity of an oration before a _Romish sacrifice_; the elegant
    composition of which ran thus—‘_Oyez_!  _Oyez_!  _Oyez_!  _If any man
    stands within twenty yards of the bull-ring_, _let him take—what
    comes_.’  After which followed the usual public ejaculations, for
    ‘the safety of the king and the mayor of the city;’ when the
    _beauties_ of the scene commenced, and the dogs immediately _fell
    to_.  Here a prayer for his worship was not unseasonable, as even the
    ermin’d cloak was no security against the carcases of dead animals,
    with which spectators, without distinction, were occasionally
    saluted.

                   [Picture: Eastgate Street, Chester]

    “We shall not attempt a description of the _tender_ offices
    practised, at such times, on so noble a creature—one, however, we
    cannot omit mentioning: in 1787, an unfortunate animal, smarting
    under his wounds and fatigue, was very _naturally_ induced to _lie
    down_;—the _argument_ made use of, in this situation, however, _as
    naturally_ induced him to _get up_; his _humane_ followers hitting
    upon the ingenious expedient of setting fire to some straw under his
    body, when, it is hardly necessary to add, ‘the wretched animal
    heav’d forth such groans, as stretch’d his leathern coat almost to
    bursting.’  This circumstance of the _fire_ was, however, no bad
    _satire_ (emblematically considered) on the transactions of the
    day—the whole being little better than a—‘burning shame.’

    “The late Dr. Cowper is said to have had the merit, when mayor, of
    putting a stop to the attendance of the corporate body on these days;
    and Mr. Alderman Brodhurst, in his mayoralty, made a laudable but
    ineffectual effort to suppress a relic of barbarism ‘more honoured in
    the _breach_ than the _observance_.’”



EASTGATE STREET,


a spacious street, forming a direct line to the Eastgate, about 209 yards
in length.  The appearance of the street has been considerably modernized
of late years; many of the old houses having been taken down, and
spacious shops and dwelling-houses erected on their site.  There is a
very interesting old crypt to be seen on the premises of Messrs. Prichard
and Dodd, which furnishes an additional illustration of the statement,
that many of the buildings in the principal streets are erected on the
remains of ancient religious houses.  Dr. Ormerod gives it as his opinion
that these conventual buildings occupied nearly, if not wholly,
one-fourth of the city.  The handsome premises occupied by Mr. Hugh
Roberts, bookseller, and by Mr. Bolland, confectioner, have latterly been
rebuilt in an elegantly appropriate style of architecture: and Messrs.
Brown are now (1858) erecting a splendid range of shops.  About
two-thirds down the street on the right is Newgate-street; and opposite
is St. Werburgh’s-street, leading to the Cathedral.  There are two
excellent inns in Eastgate-street—the Green Dragon and the Royal Hotel;
the latter being a large and lofty edifice, the front resting on round
stone pillars, between which, and the coffee-room there is a capacious
piazza.  Passing under the arch of the Eastgate, you enter



FOREGATE STREET,


a spacious airy street, about 572 yards in length, and in most parts 18
in breadth; on the right hand is St. John-street, in which is situated
the Post-office, and a little lower down the Mechanics’ Institution and
News-room.  The spacious circular building is a place of worship used by
the Wesley an Methodists.  The narrow street on the left leads to St.
John’s Church and Priory, which will amply repay a careful and attentive
study.  Returning to the Cross, we now proceed down



WATERGATE STREET,


which possesses remarkable interest, from the number of very old houses
still remaining in it.  This street has perhaps suffered less from the
innovation of modern improvement than any other part of Chester.  The
rows on both sides extend nearly to the bottom of the street, and retain
several marks of great antiquity.  In front of an old house on the south
side of the street, there is a post, with the date 1539 carved upon it.
On the same side, nearer the Cross, is an old dwelling-house, with the
inscription—

                 “God’s Providence is mine Inheritance—1652,”

cut upon a beam in front, in legible characters.  At the time when the
plague was devastating the city, this was almost the only house which was
exempt from its destructive havoc.  Gratefully sensible of this singular
blessing, the pious occupier placed this inscription on the front of his
house, as a commemorative memorial of Divine Providence.  Lower down, on
the same side, is a singularly decorated old house, having the whole
front divided into square compartments, filled with carved work of
various descriptions, principally heraldry and scripture history.  Adam
and Eve;—Cain killing Abel;—Abraham offering up Isaac;—Susannah and the
Elders—and a Martyrdom, are the principal subjects.  There are three
other compartments, two of them consisting of armorial bearings,
including the Earldoms of Chester and Derby, crested with a bishop’s
mitre; the third bears an inscription, illegible from the street, and the
date 1613.  This house was built by Dr. George Lloyd, of the family of
Lloyd of Kinmell, in North Wales, Bishop of Chester from 1604 to 1615.

                    [Picture: God’s Providence House]

Lower down, on the same side of the street, below Nicholas-street, is a
curious and spacious old palace, once the mansion of the Derby family,
which is well deserving of the visitor’s notice.  It is approached
through a narrow passage.  The front of the house presents some
interesting specimens of curiously ornamental carved work.  On this spot
once stood a _Monastery_ of the order of Black Friars.

The street on the opposite side leads to the new Linen Hall, where the
cheese fairs are periodically held.  It was built by the Irish merchants
in 1778.  At that time the imports of linen were very considerable, and a
large business was done.

At the corner of this street stands her Majesty’s Custom House.
Adjoining is Trinity Church, which contains the mortal remains of Parnell
the poet, and Matthew Henry, immortalized in his far-famed commentary.
Trinity-street contains nothing worthy of special notice: it leads,
however, to a memorable spot, of surpassing interest to all who love to
trace the “records of a good man’s life.”  Higher up is Crook-street,
where stands the chapel built for Matthew Henry.  These chapel walls once
echoed the voice of that eloquent man, who assiduously asserted the pure
principles of the Gospel.  Associated, therefore, as the place is with
the memory of a great mind, whose works have taken an honourable position
in the religious literature of the country, it cannot but be an
attraction to all who love to treasure the incidents which mark the
biography of an eminent and a worthy man.  Matthew Henry’s chapel is now
occupied by the Unitarians.

Returning to the Cross, we proceed to



NORTHGATE STREET,


which forms the northern division of the city, and is 440 yards long.  On
the east side, adjoining St. Peter’s Church, are the
Commercial-buildings, occupied as a subscription News-room, and the
Library of the Archæological Society.  The rows in Northgate-street are
chiefly formed of wood; that on the west is the only one in general use,
extending from the Cross to the Fish Market.  The regular market for
“Fish and vegetables,” says a History of Chester, 1791, “is in the square
opposite the Exchange, which, in general, are plentiful and reasonable.
In that useful article, salmon, no market in the kingdom did, some few
years ago, excel it; indeed, such was the profusion of this valuable
fish, that masters were often restricted, by a clause of indenture, from
giving it more than twice a week to their apprentices!  Though the bounty
of Providence, in this particular, is yet unabated, such restriction is
no longer necessary—some _artificial_ cause or other very _kindly_
rendering this fish, at the present day, a _delicacy_ even to the
_masters_ themselves.”



THE EXCHANGE


is situated in the Market-place, on the west side of Northgate-street.
It was commenced in 1695, and completed in 1698, at an expense of £1,000,
towards which Roger Whitley, then Mayor, contributed largely.  It is a
good brick building, ornamented with stone-work, supported by stone
pillars on the ground floor, through which is a thoroughfare from south
to north.  In a niche on the south front is a statue of Queen Anne in her
coronation robes.  On the right of this statue is a tablet, having the
arms of the Earldom of Chester on a circular shield in the centre, and
above these the coats of the Principality of Wales and Duchy of Cornwall,
having each their respective coronets over them.  The blazon of this
tablet is believed to have been furnished by the last Randle Holmes,
Deputy Norroy King at Arms, who died in 1707.  On the left of the statue
is another tablet, containing the Royal arms of England as borne by Queen
Anne.  The centre of the building is occupied by the _Common Hall_,
wherein are held the city sessions and the elections for members of
parliament for the borough.  The north end of the Common Hall is fitted
up as a court of justice, having a bench, bar, witness and jury boxes.
On each side of the bench are ornaments, composed of lictors’ fasces and
spears, used to support the sword and mace.

      [Picture: Bishop Lord’s House Watergate St. Chester A.D. 1615]

Adjoining and communicating with the Common Hall on the north is the
Council-room, commonly called the _Pentice_, where the mayor and
magistrates sit as a court of Petty Sessions.  Over the mayor’s seat in
this room is a splendid full length portrait of George the Third in his
coronation robes,—the figure by Gainsborough, the drapery by
Reynolds,—presented to the city by the late Marquis of Westminster, in
1808.  On the south side of the Exchange-buildings is the City
Assembly-room, where the meetings of the Town Council are held.  The Town
Hall, the Pentice Court, and the Assembly-room, are all decorated with
fine portraits of benefactors to the city, and of eminent men who have
been officially engaged in its highest legal appointments, or in the
administration of its municipal affairs.  Among these worthies may be
seen the donors of local charities, and other celebrities; as Recorders
Comberbach, Leycester, Levinge, Townsend, and Sir W. Williams; Sir Henry
Bunbury, M.P. for Chester in eight successive parliaments during the
reigns of Queen Anne and George the First; Sir John Grey Egerton, M.P.
for the city from 1807 to 1818; Thomas Cholmondeley, Esq., Mayor in 1761;
Robert, Earl Grosvenor, in his parliamentary robes, painted by Jackson;
Richard, Earl Grosvenor, and Thomas Grosvenor, Esq., M.P., in their robes
of the civic mayoralty, painted by West; W. Cross, Esq., first Mayor
after the passing of the Municipal Reform Act; and W. Wardell, Esq.,
Mayor in 1841.  At the north end of the Exchange is the Market,
appropriated for the sale of butter; and a few yards apart is another
building of equal breadth, but longer, for butchers’ meat, both of which
are neatly fitted up and well adapted for their respective purposes.  We
recommend the tourist now to continue his walk up the street, for the
purpose of visiting the Training College, which, we doubt not, our former
description has made him curious to see.  Supposing this to have been
done, we now return on the east side, passing through the Northgate about
100 yards, where we come to a narrow avenue on the left, under an old
archway, the remains of one of the gates of the monastery of St.
Werburgh.  A little further down, opposite the Market-hall, stands a
noble arch called



THE ABBEY GATE,


which is a Gothic pointed arch, with a postern at the side, both of which
are included in a larger obtuse one, apparently of the same order.  The
interior of the gateway is vaulted with stone, with ribs, and carved
keystones at the intersections; and the rooms over were originally
approached by a spiral staircase.  On the south side was the porter’s
lodge, and on the other St. Thomas’s-court.  Before this gate were
anciently raised the booths for the merchants frequenting the Abbot’s
fair; these booths were covered with reeds, which the monks were
empowered to gather from Stanlaw Marsh; and here also the performers in
the Chester Mysteries commenced the exhibition of their pageants.  This
was formerly the grand entrance into the monastery, which appears to have
occupied a very extensive range.  On passing through the arched gateway
we enter into the Abbey-square.  On the right hand is a wall, enclosing
the episcopal palace, which was rebuilt by Bishop Keene, out of his
private resources, at an expense of £2,200, soon after his promotion to
the see in 1752.  In former days the residence of the Abbots of St.
Werburgh stood on this site.  The spacious edifice at the end of the
palace wall is the Registry Office, of which Dickens has given an
interesting sketch in his ‘Household Words,’ in one of his able papers,
entitled, ‘The Doom of English Wills.’  The entire arrangements and
management of the office are described in terms of unqualified
commendation, highly complimentary to the talented registrar, who is
described as “a gentleman who fulfils the duties of his office in person
with assiduity.”  In the centre of the square is a shrubbery, enclosed
with an iron palisading, having in the centre an elliptic column, which
was once a pillar under the Exchange; but on removing it to build a shop
there, the Corporation presented it to the Dean and Chapter, who
appropriated it to its present use.  In the north-east angle of the
square is the Deanery, built on the site where once stood an old Gothic
structure, called St. Thomas’s Chapel.  Returning into Northgate-street,
the next narrow avenue on the left gives us a fine view of the west
transept of the Cathedral, with its beautiful window, enriched with
elegant tracery.  A few paces below we arrive at



THE MUSIC HALL, formerly THE THEATRE ROYAL.


The citizens of Chester appear to have been early distinguished for a
love of theatricals.  From a MS. entitled, “Certayne collections of
aunchiante times concerninge the aunchiante and famous Citty of Chester,”
by Archdeacon Rogers, we learn that in the beginning of the fourteenth
century, Randal Higden, a monk of Chester, “translated the Bible into
several partes and plays, so as the common people might learne the same
by theyre playinge.”  These _spectacles_, then called the _Whitsun
Plays_, were first performed in 1328, during the mayoralty of Sir John
Arneway, at the expense of the city companies; and being “profitable for
them, for all both far and near came to see them,” they were repeated
annually on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday in Whitsun week, for nearly
250 years, until 1574, when they were suppressed by authority.  The
theatre for these performances was of the original Thespian cast, a
four-wheeled scaffold or waggon, whereof the body served for a tyring
room, and the roof for the stage, whereon the members of the different
city companies did “each man play his part.”  The first place of
performance was at the Abbey Gate, that “the monks and churche might have
the first sighte, and then the stage was drawne to the High Crosse before
the Mayor and Aldermen, and soe from streete to streete; and when one
pageant was ended another came in the place thereof, till all that were
appoynted for the daye were ended.”  Each company had its own peculiar
parts allotted to its members to perform in the Whitsun Plays, of which a
list is given in the above quoted MS.

                       [Picture: Old Palace House]

In addition to the Whitsun Plays, the citizens were anciently entertained
with processional pageants by the different companies, which latter
appear to have survived the suppression of the former for many years.
They were suppressed for some time by the party in power during the
Commonwealth, but revived with great splendour at the Restoration.

The pageants were abolished by order of the Corporation in 1678.

“No circumstance,” says the old History from which we have already
quoted, “can evince the strange mutations to which things are liable,
more than this place, which was originally a _chapel_ dedicated to _St.
Nicholas_, and devoted to _religion_; afterwards a _common hall_ devoted
to _justice_; next a _warehouse_ devoted to _trade_; and now a
_playhouse_ devoted to _amusement_.”

The present writer has to note another change: the “Playhouse” has become
a MUSIC HALL, handsome and commodious.  A few years since a company was
formed for the purpose of erecting a spacious Hall, available for musical
and literary recreations, public meetings, and social celebrations.  The
Hall was built by Mr. J. D. Williams, from designs by Mr. James Harrison;
and a remarkably fine organ, by Jackson, of Liverpool, has also been
erected.  Seats are fitted up for an audience of 1,400 persons, and the
orchestra is capable of accommodating 300 performers.  The cost of the
building, with the organ and fittings, was £5,000.  The Hall was opened,
on November 26th, 1855, with a grand Miscellaneous Concert, at which
Madame Clara Novello was the principal vocalist, and was crowded by a
brilliant gathering of the beauty and fashion of the city and
neighbourhood.  Since that time it has frequently been used for the
performance of oratorios and concerts, for lectures, public meetings, and
other purposes, except theatrical entertainments, which are prohibited by
the terms of the lease under which the site is held from the
ecclesiastical commissioners, in whom the fee simple of the property is
vested.

Returning to the Cross, whence we set out, we now direct our attention to



BRIDGE STREET,


which is an open and spacious street, in length from the Cross to the
Bridge about 554 yards.  This street is characterized by many striking
features of deep interest to the antiquarian, and indeed to all who love
to visit the localities which are associated with any remarkable events
of our national and ecclesiastical history.  Although the buildings now
present a much more modern aspect than they did some years ago, there are
still remaining many conspicuous proofs of the antiquity of the city, and
many curious remains which give it peculiar attractions.

A little way down the street, on the left hand, is a house now occupied
by Mr. W. Brittain, woollen draper, which is rendered remarkable from a
peculiar, and, as it resulted, _fortunate_ incident, which occurred there
in 1558.  In that year Dr. Cole, Dean of St. Paul’s, came to Chester on
his way to Ireland, entrusted with a commission from Queen Mary, for
prosecuting the Protestants in that part of the kingdom.  The
commissioner stopped one night in this house on his way, then a noted
inn, called the _Blue Posts_, where he was visited by the Mayor, to whom,
in the course of conversation, he communicated his errand, taking out a
leather box out of his cloak bag, and saying, in a tone of exultation,
“Here is what will lash the heretics of Ireland!”  This announcement was
overheard by the landlady of the house, who had a brother in Dublin; and
whilst the commissioner was complimenting his worship down stairs, the
good woman, prompted by a tender regard for the safety of her brother,
opened the box, and taking out the commission, placed in its stead a pack
of cards, with the knave of clubs uppermost.  The unsuspecting Doctor
packed up the box again, and with its far different contents proceeded on
his journey.  On his arrival at the Castle of Dublin, the precious box
was presented to the Lord Deputy and Privy Council, who, on opening it,
found, in the place of the commission, the pack of cards, prefaced with
the significant _knave of clubs_.  The surprise of the assembly was of
course very great, and the Doctor’s perhaps the greatest of all; he was
not lack in his protestations that the commission he _had_ received, and
was entirely ignorant how it had disappeared.  “Let us have another
commission,” said the Deputy; and forthwith the amazed and chagrined
commissioner returned to Court for the purpose; but before he could
return to Ireland, Queen Mary died.  Elizabeth, her successor, rewarded
the woman, whose name was Elizabeth Edwards, with a pension of £40 a year
during her life.

A little lower down, on the same side, are the remains of a Roman Bath
and Hypocaust, which we have described under the head of “Roman
Antiquities.”  This curious relic, we take for granted, the visitor will
“go and see.”

A little further is the neat little church of St. Michael, recently
erected on the site of the old church, which had become so much
dilapidated, that apprehensions were excited for its safety.

Passing Pepper-street, adjoining St. Michael’s, we next meet with THE
ALBION HOTEL, a capacious building, connected with which is an
Assembly-room, and behind the premises extensive pleasure-grounds and a
bowling-green.

Passing on to the lower end of the street, we come to St. Olave’s Church,
an edifice of very mean pretensions, but of very ancient foundation.  In
the copy of an old Court Roll, the advowson of St. Olave’s is mentioned
among other advowsons, belonging to the Abbey of St. Werburgh.  A clerk
was instituted and inducted upon the presentation of the Abbey, in the
time of King John.  Divine service is discontinued at St. Olave’s, and
the parishioners attend St. Michael’s.  Continuing down the street we
arrive at a handsome arch called the Bridgegate, beyond which is the old
bridge, which will lead the tourist (should his curiosity incline him) to
Edgar’s Cave, already described under the head of antiquities.

Returning on the west side of the street, we come to a steep lane, called
St. Mary’s-hill, which leads to the Castle and to St. Mary’s Church, a
most interesting edifice, worthy of the tourist’s examination.

Opposite St. Olave’s Church, before mentioned, is an old house, formerly
occupied by the Gamul family, which possesses great interest from the
fact of its having given protection to Charles I. during the siege of
Chester by the Parliamentary forces.  There is some very curious painted
panel work and beautiful carving in the interior, which render it well
worthy of inspection.  A little higher up is an antiquated building
called “The Falcon Inn,” a fine specimen of the old timber houses of
Chester.  Adjoining this house formerly stood the OLD LAMB ROW, which was
one of the most remarkable objects of curiosity in the city.  The
materials of which the buildings were composed were the same as that of
the Falcon, which is probably an older building than the Old Lamb-row
was.  It was constructed of massy beams of oak, heavy roofs, and the
interstices of the timber in the fronts filled up with sticks and clay.
The age of the row is pretty clearly determined by the inscription on a
stone, discovered after the fall of the building:—

                                   16—H—55
                                    R. H.

The initials of Randle Holme, the builder.  This was the mansion of the
family of Holme, the famous Cheshire antiquaries.  In the year 1670, the
third Randle made some important and obnoxious alterations, which brought
upon him the censure of the Corporation, who ordered that “the nuisance
erected by Randle Holme in his new building in Bridge-street, near to the
two churches, be taken down, as it annoys his neighbours, and hinders
their prospect from their houses.”  He proceeded with his work, however,
_sans cérémonie_; and in the following year Mr. Holme, painter, “was
fined £3 6s. 8d. for contempt to the Mayor, in _proceeding_ in his
building in Bridge-street.”  It continued the residence of that heraldic
family so late as 1707.  It appears that the Holme family subsequently
sank into extreme indigence, and at no very distant period, we believe, a
descendant was an occasional boots and waiter at a tavern in Liverpool.
Such are the reverses of fortune!  How this property became alienated
from the Holmeses has not been ascertained.  It was occupied about the
middle of the last century as a public-house, called “The Lamb,” whence
it derived the name of the Lamb-row.  In 1821, in the middle of the day,
it suddenly gave way and tumbled into the street: happily without any
injury to the inhabitants.  An old woman was sitting in the upper room at
the moment the overhanging roof bore down the trembling building beneath;
the wall of the apartment separated within six inches of a chair on which
she was seated, but she fortunately escaped.

After passing Grosvenor-street, we come to White Friars, which derives
its name from a monastery of Carmelites or White Friars being once
located there.  The next turning is Common Hall-street, so called from
its being the place where the Common Hall of the city formerly stood, as
its name imports.  Some think that it occupied the site of a building now
used as a Dissenting chapel; but Ormerod is of opinion that it stood on
the _south_ side of the street, near to several old almshouses which
still remain.

Prior to the era of the Reformation, Chester abounded in religious
institutions and edifices.  We have already indicated this fact, in
pointing out the localities where some of these religious buildings were
situated.  There are many convincing evidences, in the lower part of
several houses in the principal streets, that they have been erected on
the ruins of these ecclesiastical foundations.  A remarkable instance in
support of this supposition has recently been brought to light, upon
clearing out an underground cellar behind the shop of Messrs. Powell and
Edwards, cutlers, a little farther up in the street, when the remains of



AN ANCIENT CHAPEL


were discovered.  The public are much indebted to the care and good taste
of these gentlemen, that this valuable antiquity has been so admirably
preserved; and as they are most courteous in affording strangers the
privilege of examining it, we doubt not that the opportunity will be
gladly taken.  The chapel is of an oblong form, running from east to
west.  Its dimensions are 42 feet in length, 15 feet 3 inches in breadth,
and the height, from the surface of the floor to the intersections of the
groining of the roof, 14 feet.  It was partially lighted through the
upper part of the west end, in which there are three small windows,
divided by stone mullions, and protected by iron bars.  On examining the
intersection of the groins, marks were discovered on the stonework, that
a couple of lamps had been used for lighting.  The entrance to the east
end was by a flight of steps cut out of the rock; this passage is now
closed, but from what remains there is no doubt this was the case.  On
the south side is an Anglo-Norman-Gothic doorway, attained by three or
four circular steps, and forming an outlet within its inner and outer
wall, by another flight of steps, to the surface above the building.  At
the west end are two niches, in which the baptismal fonts are supposed to
have been placed; one of these was found during the excavation, and is
deposited in one of these recesses; the other was unfortunately destroyed
by the workmen.  The date of the erection of this interesting structure
is supposed to be early in the thirteenth century.  Taking into
consideration the fact that not far from this spot were the monasteries
of Grey Friars and White Friars, it has been conjectured by some that in
this chapel they assembled for their religious celebrations.  It seems to
be, however, a more feasible hypothesis, that the site was once occupied
by some order of religious house; that the chapel formed a part of the
erection, and was used by the inmates for their religious ceremonies and
worship.  In the upper part of the premises there appear to be some
characteristic remains of the ancient structure.  Lacking any further
evidence as to the character and extent of this venerable building than
the place itself supplies, the question is involved in uncertainty.  The
crypt is a most interesting curiosity, worthy of the investigation of the
antiquarian, and to his better judgment we leave the subject.

          [Picture: Chester Cathedral, South West View A.D. 875]




CHAPTER V.
CHESTER CATHEDRAL.


PREVIOUS to the Roman conquests, the Britons were accustomed to celebrate
the rites of Druidism; but as it was the custom of the Romans to carry
into the lands they conquered not only their civil polity, but also their
religion, the gods of the Pantheon became consequently the gods of our
ancestors.  Near the existing memorials of Druidical superstition there
arose the majestic fanes of a more polished mythology.  At Bath there is
said to have been a temple dedicated to Minerva, while on the site now
occupied by the splendid cathedral of St. Paul there was a temple to
Diana.  It appears, from a passage in King’s ‘Vale Royal,’ there was a
tradition generally accepted in his day, that on the present site of
Chester Cathedral was a temple dedicated to Apollo, during the period
that the city was inhabited by the Legionaries.

“I have heard it,” he says, “from a scholar residing in the city, when I
was there, anno 1653, that there was a temple dedicated to Apollo in
olden time, in a place adjoining to the Cathedral Church, by the constant
tradition of the learned.”

We are not aware that the supposition is capable of being verified by any
existing record; but when we take into consideration the policy generally
pursued by the Romans in subjugating a country, it seems to be
countenanced by strong probability.  With this form of Paganism, however,
there came zealous men, of true apostolic stamp, whose earnest
inculcation of vital principles accelerated the progress of a better
faith.  So conspicuous had that progress become early in the third
century, that Tertullian, in his work written against the Jews, A.D. 209,
states that “even those places in Britain hitherto inaccessible to the
Roman arms, have been subdued by the gospel of Christ.”

The ground on which the temple of Apollo once stood (if the tradition be
trustworthy) was occupied, early in the second century, by a monastery
dedicated to St. Peter and St. Paul, “which was the mother church and
burial place to all Chester, and seven miles about Chester, and so
continued for the space of three hundred years and more.”  To this
monastery (according to Bradshaw the monk) the relics of St. Werburgh,
daughter of Wulphere, King of Mercia, were removed from Hanbury in 875,
for fear of an incursion of the Danes, and here re-buried with great
pomp; a ceremony usually called “the translation of the body.”  The same
author informs us that the army of Griffin, King of Wales, was stricken
with blindness for their sacrilegious boldness, in attempting to disturb
these sainted remains.  This, and other reputed miracles of St. Werburgh,
appear to have induced the celebrated Ethelfleda, Countess of Mercia, to
translate the monastery of St. Peter and St. Paul to the centre of the
city, and to erect on its site a convent or monastery of secular nuns,
dedicated to St. Werburgh and St. Oswald.  Earl Leofric was a great
benefactor to this foundation, having repaired its decayed buildings at
his own expense: and in 1093, when (says Rodolphus Glaber) “princes
strove _à vie_ that cathedral churches and minsters should be erected in
a more decent and seemly form, and when Christendom roused, as it were,
herself, and, casting away her old habiliments, did put on every where
the bright and white robe of the churches.”  Hugh Lupus expelled the
canons secular, and laid the foundation of a magnificent building, the
remains of which are still existing; it was established by him as an
Abbey of Benedictine Monks from Bec in Normandy, to pray (as the
foundation charter expresses it) “for the soul of William their King, and
those of King William his most noble father, his mother Queen Maud, his
brothers and sisters, King Edward the Confessor, themselves the founders,
and those of their fathers, mothers, antecessors, heirs, parents, and
barons, and of all Christians as well living as deceased.”  The
confirmation charter by the second Ranulf (surnamed De Gernon or
Gernons), Earl of Chester, in which the grant of Hugh Lupus is
recapitulated, is in the possession of the Marquis of Westminster, by
whose kindness this most important and interesting instrument has been
lent for the use of the Archæological Association, and has been published
in the pages of their journal.  It is most beautifully written in columns
or pages, for the facility of reading.  The charter occupies nine, and
commences with the copy of the original grant of “Hugone Cestreasi
comite, anno ab incarnatione Domini millesimo nonugesimo” to the Abbey of
St. Werburgh, which was witnessed by Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury,
followed by the grants of several of the other witnesses, and it
concludes by the confirmation of them all by the second Ranulf: (Ego
secundus Ranulfus comes “Cestrie concedo et confirmo hos omnibus
donationes quos mei antecessores vel barones eor’m dederunt,”) with
additional grants from himself.  Anselm, Abbot of Bec, afterward
Archbishop of Canterbury, regulated the new foundation, and appointed
Richard, his chaplain, the first abbot.

Hugh Lupus, following the example of most of his predecessors, lived a
life of the wildest luxury and rapine.  At length, falling sick from the
consequence of his excesses, and age and disease coming on, the old
hardened soldier was struck with remorse; and—an expiation common enough
in those days—the great Hugh Lupus took the cowl, retired in the last
state of disease into the monastery, and in three days was no more.

The Abbey was so richly endowed by the founder and his successors, that
at the dissolution its revenues amounted to no less a sum than £1,073
17s. 7d. per annum.

On the general dissolution of the monasteries, Chester was erected into
an independent bishopric, and St. Werburgh’s was converted into a
Cathedral Church, which it has ever since remained.  It was dedicated to
Christ and the Blessed Virgin Mary; and a dean and six prebendaries
installed in it, Thomas Clarke, the last abbot, being appointed the first
dean.

The principal portions of this venerable pile have been erected at
different periods from the fourteenth to the sixteenth century, although
there are some parts which bear indubitable marks of a much earlier
origin; the greater part, perhaps, belongs to the fourteenth or fifteenth
century, when the richly decorated style of Gothic architecture was at
its zenith in this country.  The Cathedral, from whatever side it is
viewed, presents a massive appearance, and exhibits a pleasing variety of
styles, in accordance with the taste of different ages.  Mr. Asphitel has
said that he found beauties which grew on him more and more at every
visit.  The Norman remains are extremely fine—there is work of all kinds
of great beauty—and there are the most curious and instructive
transitions from style to style that perhaps were ever contained in one
building.

Its general style may be termed the Norman-Gothic.  It has been generally
supposed that there are also some remaining specimens of the Saxon; but
Mr. Asphitel, in an interesting lecture delivered before the British
Archæological Association, stated that he could not, from the most minute
research, discover any portion of the Saxon church; he considered it
possible there might be some portions in the foundations, but none were
visible.

The west front is said to have been the work of Abbot Ripley, who was
appointed to the abbacy in 1485.  It is now in an unfinished state, and
it seems more than probable that there was an intention to form two
western towers.  The foundation of them was laid with much ceremony by
Abbot Birchensaw in 1508, the Mayor being then present; but the project
was abandoned, most likely for want of funds: had the original design
been executed, says Winkle, it would not have been very imposing.  The
west entrance is a singular and beautiful composition: the door itself is
a Tudor arch, enclosed within a square head; the spandrils are filled
with rich and elegant foliations; the hollow moulding on the top is deep
and broad, and filled with a row of angels, half-lengths; all this is
recessed within another Tudor arch, under another square head, with plain
spandrils of ordinary panelling.  On each side of the door are four
niches, with their usual accompaniments of crocketted canopies,
pinnacles, and pendants; and instead of brackets, the statues formerly
stood on pedestals, with good bases and capitals.  Above this entrance is
the great western window of the nave, deeply and richly recessed; it is
of eight lights, with elaborate tracery of the kind most common in the
latest age of the pointed style.  The arch of the window is much
depressed, and has above it a flowing crocketted canopy; the gable has no
parapet, but is finished off with a simple coping; the flanking-turrets
are octagonal, and have belts of panelled tracery and embattled parapets.
Leaving the west front, and turning to the south, a rich and deep porch
presents itself behind the Consistory Court; the porch is flanked by
buttresses, which once had pinnacles.  The entrance is under a Tudor arch
within a square head, the spandrils richly panelled; over the square head
is a broad belt of quatrefoil panelling; above that a hollow moulding,
adorned with the Tudor flower; above this are two flat-headed windows of
two lights each, with a deep niche between them, resting on a projecting
bracket; the statue is of course gone, but the projecting and richly
decorated canopy remains, on both sides of which the wall above is
adorned with two rows of panelling; the open embattled parapet, which
once crowned the whole, has disappeared.  The south side of the nave and
its aisle is plain, but not without dignity; the windows are all pointed,
and of perpendicular character; those of the aisle have straight
canopies, with projecting buttresses between, which still have niches,
and once had both pinnacles and statues; the aisle has no parapet.  The
windows of the clerestory are unusually large and lofty, and their
canopies are flowing in form, but perfectly plain and without finials;
they have no buttresses between them, and the parapet is very shallow and
quite plain.

The next feature of the Cathedral is a very singular one, and, indeed,
unique—viz., the south wing of the transept.  It is no uncommon case to
find the two portions of the transept unlike each other in some respects;
but in no other instance are they so perfectly dissimilar as at Chester.
Here the south wing is nearly as long as the nave, and of equal length
with the choir, and considerably broader than either, having, like them,
aisles on both sides; while the north, which probably stands on the
original foundations, has no aisles, is very short, and only just the
breadth of one side of the central tower.  The east and west faces of
this south portion of the transept are nearly similar.  The aisles have
no parapet; the windows are pointed, of four lights each, with late
decorated tracery and small intervening buttresses.  The clerestory has a
parapet similar to that of the nave; the windows are pointed, large, and
lofty, with perpendicular tracery and two transoms.  The south front of
this transept, flat at top, is flanked with square embattled turrets and
buttresses, and has a large window of the perpendicular age, filling up
nearly all the space between them.  The south face of the aisles, on each
side, have pointed windows and sloping tops, without parapet, but flanked
by double buttresses at the external angles, without pinnacles.

The south face of the choir, with its aisle, is in nearly all respects
similar to the south portion of the transept; but the aisle is lengthened
out beyond the choir, and becomes the side aisle of the Lady Chapel, and
has an octangular turret near the east end, with embattled parapet, and
beyond it a plain, heavy, clumsy buttress; the sloping parapet of the
east face of this aisle meets at the top the flat plain parapet of the
most eastern compartment of the Lady Chapel, which projects beyond the
aisle to that extent.  The windows of the Lady Chapel are all pointed,
and of good perpendicular character; the projecting portion has double
buttresses at the external angles, and the eastern face has a low gable
point.  This chapel is very little higher than the side aisles of the
choir, the east face of which is seen over it, with a large lofty pointed
window, with perpendicular tracery and several transoms, flanked with
octagonal turrets engaged, and terminated with something like domes of
Elizabethan architecture.  The parapet of this east face of the choir is
flat.  The north side of the Lady Chapel is similar to the south; the
choir and its aisles exhibit features of an early English character on
this side, but the Chapter-room, which is a small building, of an oblong
form, and also of early English architecture, conceals a considerable
portion.  Over its vestibule and the arched passage leading into the east
walk of the cloister, is seen the large window in the north front of the
transept; the arch is much depressed, the tracery very common and plain,
and it has two transoms; the walls of this wing of the transept are very
plain, flat at top, and no parapet.  The whole north side of the nave can
be seen only from the cloister-yard.  The south walk of the cloister is
gone, and in the wall of the aisle, below the windows, are still seen
several enriched semicircular arches resting on short cylindrical
columns, evidently belonging to the original church of Hugh Lupus.  The
windows of the aisle are Tudor arched, with the ordinary tracery of this
period; but, owing to the cloister once existing beneath, are necessarily
curtailed of half their due length: there is a thin, flat buttress
between each; the aisle has no parapet.  The clerestory is lofty, and the
windows pointed, and not so much depressed as those in the aisle beneath:
they are not so lofty as those in the south side, nor have they any
canopies.  There is a thin buttress between each, without pinnacles, and
the parapet is quite plain, but not so shallow as that on the south side.

The central tower is perhaps the best external feature of this Cathedral,
it is indeed only of one story above the roof ridge, but it is loftier
than such towers usually are; in each face of it are two pointed windows,
divided down the middle with a single mullion, with a quatrefoil at the
top, and all of them having flowing crocketted canopies with finials.  At
each of the four angles of the tower is an octagonal turret engaged, all
of which, like the tower itself, are terminated with an embattled
parapet.

               [Picture: The Cloisters, Chester Cathedral]

On entering the interior, through the west doorway into the nave, “some
disappointment and regret,” says the same authority, “cannot but be felt:
here is no vaulted roof, but a flat ceiling of wood, resting on brackets
of the same material, slightly arched, which gives the nave the
appearance of having less elevation than it really possesses; for the
naves of many much more magnificent cathedrals are not so lofty as this
by several feet, but by being vaulted, their apparent height is
increased.”  The stone vaulting appears to have been actually commenced,
and was probably interrupted by the dissolution: it is to be regretted
that the work was not completed, as it would have given to the nave a
much more imposing effect.  The north wall of the nave, to the height of
the windows, is Norman work, and contains, on the side of the cloisters,
six tombs, where, as it appears from an old MS. written on the back of an
old charter, now in the British Museum, the early Norman Abbots are
interred.  Under a wide arch sunk in the south wall, which, from the
ornaments attached to the pillar near it, appears part of the original
building, is a coffin-shaped stone, with a cross fleury on the lid, over
the remains of some abbot.  Nearly opposite to this is an altar tomb, the
sides of which are ornamented with Gothic niches, with trefoil heads, and
with quatrefoils set alternately, the quatrefoils being also alternately
filled with roses and leopards’ heads; the lid slides, and discloses the
lead coffin, a part of which has been cut away; on the lid is a plain
coffin-shaped stone.  It is highly probable that this tomb contains the
remains of one of the later abbots.

The pillars of the nave are clustered, and have rich bases and foliated
capitals, and the arches are pointed.  In this part of the Cathedral and
the north transept are several monuments worthy the attention of
visitors.  A pyramidical monument by Nollekens, representing a female
figure resting on a rock, against which is placed a broken anchor;
erected by Captain John Matthews, R.N., to the memory of his wife.  One,
in white marble, by Banks, representing the Genius of History weeping
over an urn, having three vols., inscribed ‘Longinus,’ ‘Thucydides,’
‘Zenophon,’ placed by it; erected to the memory of Dean Swift, the
learned translator of those works.  One to the memory of Mrs. Barbara
Dod, erected by the minor canons.  One to Captain John William Buchanan,
of the 16th Light Dragoons, slain at the battle of Waterloo.  One of
Cavalier Sir William Mainwaring, killed at Chester during the great civil
war, 1644.  Against the north wall a handsome monument, enclosing a bust
of Sir J. G. Egerton, Bart., erected by subscriptions of the citizens of
Chester, in memory of their honourable and independent representative.
One in memory of Major Thomas Hilton, who died at Montmeir, in the
Burmese empire, 2nd February, 1829.  One to Augusta, the wife of the Rev.
James Slade, Canon of the Cathedral, and daughter of Bishop Law.  One of
Captain John Moor Napier, who died of Asiatic cholera, in Scinde, July
7th, 1846, aged 28 years: this monument was executed by Westmacott; the
inscription was written by his uncle, the gallant Sir Charles Napier, and
is as follows:—

    “The tomb is no record of high lineage;
    His may be traced by his name.
    His race was one of soldiers:
    Among soldiers he lived, among them he died,
    A soldier, falling where numbers fell with him,
    In a barbarous land.
    Yet there died none more generous,
    More daring, more gifted, more religious.
    On his early grave
    Fell the tears of stern and hardy men,
    As his had fallen on the grave of others.”

    “To the memory of their comrade, the officers of the General Staff in
    Scinde erect this cenotaph.”—[The above was executed by Westmacott.]

In the north transept is a piece of very fine tapestry, executed after
one of the cartoons of Raphael, representing the history of Elymas the
sorcerer.  Wright, in his travels through France and Italy, expresses his
opinion that this is much superior to any of the tapestry which he saw in
the Vatican.  There is also a well-executed stone monument to Roger
Barnston, Esq.; and a tablet in memory of good Chancellor Peploe.  A
beautifully executed marble monument has lately been placed on the wall
of the north transept to the memory of Colonel T. Graham Egerton, of the
77th Regiment, who fell at the siege of Sebastopol, in April, 1855.

The choir well merits the attention of every visitor of taste.  From the
organ-loft to the Bishop’s throne, the sides are ornamented with rich
spiral tabernacle work, underneath which are massive and highly
ornamented stalls.  The choir is separated from the nave and broad aisle
by a Gothic stone screen; there are five pointed arches on each side;
above them is an arcade of pointed arches, resting on slender shafts, and
above it are the clerestory windows.  The pavement of the choir is of
black and white marble.  At the west end of it are four stalls on each
side of the entrance, and there are twenty others on each side of the
choir; over these are rich canopies, with pinnacles and pendants in great
profusion.  Above the stalls on the right hand, opposite the pulpit, is
the Bishop’s throne, which formerly stood at the east end in St. Mary’s
Chapel, and is said to have been the shrine of St. Werburgh, or, as
suggested by Pennant, the pedestal on which originally stood the real
shrine which contained the sacred relics.  At the Reformation it was
removed to its present position, and converted into a throne for the
Bishop.  It is a rich specimen of Gothic architecture, decorated with
carved work, and embellished with a range of thirty curious small
statues, variously habited, holding scrolls in their hands, and
originally inscribed with their names, but now defaced.  Dr. Cowper
published, in 1799, an elaborate history of these figures, and was of
opinion that they represented kings and saints of the royal Mercian line,
ancestors or relations of St. Werburgh.  Very great improvements have
recently been effected within the choir.  The restoration of the Bishop’s
throne was effected by the munificence of the Rev. Canon Slade, as an
obituary testimonial to his late father-in-law, Bishop Law, in memory of
whom the following incription, engraven upon a brass plate, is affixed to
the throne:—

    In gloriam Dei hanc cathedram reficiendam curabit A.D. MDCCCXLVI.
    Jacobus Slade, A.M. hujus ecclesiae Canonicus.  Recnon in piam
    memoriam Georgii Henrici Law, S.T.D. per xii. annos Episcopi
    Testriensis, dein Bathoniensis.

At the back of the throne is a magnificent stone screen, the gift of the
Archbishop of Canterbury.  The altar screen was presented by the Rev.
Peploe Hamilton, of Hoole, near Chester; the chair within the communion
table by the Rev. Canon Blomfield; the new Bible desk, of carved oak in
the form of an eagle, by the Rev. Chancellor Raikes; the new stone
pulpit, from a beautiful design by Mr. Hussey, was the liberal gift of
Sir Edward S. Walker, of Chester.  Towards the restoration of the
Cathedral, Her Majesty the Queen also contributed a donation of £105, in
the name of the Prince of Wales as Earl of Chester.

Under the east window is an arch opening to the Lady Chapel, which
consists of a middle and two side aisles, the stone vaulting of which is
adorned with richly carved key-stones.  The side aisles are divided from
the middle portion of two arches, sprung from a massive pier on each
side, apparently part of the original building, cut down and crusted over
with clusters of light pillars, terminated in elegant pointed arches,
with quatrefoils inserted in the mouldings.  On the north side of the
chancel, which extends beyond the side aisles, are two elegant pointed
arches: one contains two piscinas; the other was apparently a seat for
the officiating priest; another pointed arch appears also on the opposite
side.

The cloisters are on the north side of the Church, and form a quadrangle
of 110 feet square.  Originally there were four walks, but the south walk
is destroyed.  The general style of the cloisters is that of the
fifteenth century, with carved cornice key-stones at the intersections of
the vaulting; the arches of the windows are depressed.  A lavatory
projects from the west walk of the cloisters, and did extend along the
south walk; over the east walk was a dormitory, which was some time ago
destroyed, much to the injury of the appearance of these venerable
conventual ruins.  It is obvious that the present cloisters are only a
restoration of an earlier one.  In the east walk of the cloisters is the
entrance into the Chapter House.  The stone vaulting rests in clusters of
slender shafts, with foliated capitals; notwithstanding the soft nature
of the stone, the carving is all in a good state of preservation.  The
Chapter House was built in the beginning of the twelfth century, by
Randle, Earl of Chester, who removed hither, from the churchyard, the
body of his uncle, Hugh Lupus, whose remains were found enclosed in a
stone coffin in 1723, by persons employed in digging in the Chapter
House.  The skull and bones were entire, and lay in their proper
position, enveloped in an ox-hide.  On the breast was a piece of cloth,
the texture of which could not be ascertained.  Mr. Asphitel considers
the Chapter House, with its singularly tasteful vestibule, to be the
finest in the kingdom.

We now direct the visitor’s attention to a portion of the Norman edifice,
which has of late excited very great interest, the Promptuarium, lately
excavated: “the chamber is a sort of gallery or cloister on the ground
floor, about ninety feet long by forty feet wide, traversed in the centre
by a row of pillars (with one exception cylindrical), which divide it
into six double bays, from which pillars, and four corresponding ones at
each side, spring the intersecting arches by which the building is
vaulted.  The side pillars are as entirely Norman in their character as
the centre ones, being simply the square pier, on each face of which is
the pilaster attached; the groining of the roof is without the finish of
ribs at the joints, a finish characteristic of a later period.  The
chamber, which has at present only a borrowed light from the cloisters on
the east, was originally lighted from the west side by a window in each
bay, except the second bay from the south end, in which was a principal
entrance.  This doorway and the windows are now all choked up by the
adjoining garden.  On the same side, and at the north end, is a very
large chimney and fire-place.  A glance at the groining and arches at the
north end informing us that the chamber did formerly end here, I was
induced to think, by this situation of the fire-place, that its length
was originally very much greater.  I have since found the termination of
the chamber in the cellars of the present Registry, where the groining is
supported by corbels, which show that the vaults extended there, but no
further.  One double bay, therefore, added to the present remains, gives
us the entire length of the building—about 105 feet.  In this last bay,
on the east side, is a principal doorway (four inches wider than the one
on the west side), leading towards the Refectory.  On the east side also,
and near the north end, is a postern from the cloisters and a spiral
staircase, partly constructed in the thickness of the wall, leading to
the chamber above, of which there are now no remains.  Two small archways
at opposite sides of the chamber, precisely similar in form and size, and
rising from beneath the level of the floor, seemed to indicate a
subterranean passage connecting them.  An excavation round each has,
however, discovered no channel between them.  In considering the
character and situation of this vaulted chamber, it should be borne in
mind, that though now apparently subterranean, it is only so with
reference to the west side, the level of the floor being four feet above
the level of the nave of the Cathedral.  The ground, which now rises
above it on the west side, is all _made_ ground of late date, belonging
to the Palace, the original level of which is identical with this
chamber, as shown by the area round the present Palace kitchens, and by
those apartments belonging to the Abbot’s residence, which yet remain.”
{75}

Mr. Asphitel, in his able lecture on Chester Cathedral, bestowed the name
of Promptuarium on this Norman cloister: he says—“These are vaulted
apartments of early Norman work, and are described in the charter of
Henry Eighth, by which he divides the properties between the Bishop and
Dean, _promptuaria et pannaria_, the former derived from a word denoting
a butler or steward, probably a buttery; and the latter, from _pannus_, a
cloth, probably the place for clothing.”

Mr. Ayrton, in an able paper on the Norman remains of the Cathedral, read
before the Chester Archæological Association, entered into an elaborate
inquiry on the subject, stating his reasons for concluding that this is
not a _Promptuarium_, but, in his opinion, a spacious Hall, where the
splendid hospitality of the Abbots was displayed to strangers, friends,
and dependents.

There is a vaulted passage at the south end of the _Promptuarium_,
leading from the Abbot’s apartments to the Cathedral: the arches are
circular, the groining is ribbed with elliptical mouldings; these
mouldings stamp a semi-Norman character on the work, being almost a
transition to the early English style.

    “Two beautiful Norman doorways gave ingress and egress from the
    passage, and still remain, though the one which opened to the present
    west cloister is closed, and sadly disfigured by the alterations of
    the sixteenth century.  The other doorway, to the west, is yet
    perfect, excepting the shafts of the pillars, which are gone.  At the
    south end of the east cloister, and forming the present entrance from
    that cloister to the Cathedral, is a Norman doorway of about the same
    date as the arcade adjoining it.  The architrave is very ornate,
    bearing the billet ornaments, accompanied by a bead which runs
    between the mouldings; the capitals of the pilasters are foliated,
    and identical with those already noticed in the Norman doorway of the
    vaulted passage.”

The dimensions of the Cathedral are as follows:—Length from east to west,
350 feet; nave, 160; choir, 125; Lady Chapel, 65; transept from north to
south, 180; breadth of nave, choir, and aisles, 74½ feet; south wing of
transept, 80 feet square; height of nave and choir, 78 feet; tower, 127;
Lady Chapel, 33; north wing of transept, 39 feet broad.

The following is a list of the Bishops, from the foundation of the see,
in 1541, to the present date:—

John Bird               1541
George Cotes            1554
Cuthbert Scott          1555
William Downham         1561
William Chadderton      1579
Hugh Bellot             1595
Richard Vaughan         1595
George Lloyd            1604
Gerard Massie           1615
Thomas Moreton          1616
John Bridgeman          1618
Brian Walton            1660
Henry Ferne             1662
George Hall             1662
John Wilkins            1668
John Pearson            1672
Thomas Cartwright       1688
Nicholas Stratford      1689
William Dawes           1707
Francis Gastrell        1714
Samuel Peploe           1716
Edmund Keene            1752
William Markham         1771
Beilby Porteus          1777
William Cleaver         1788
H. W. Majendie          1800
E. B. Sparke            1810
G. H. Law               1812
C. J. Blomfield         1824
J. B. Sumner            1828
J. Graham               1848

List of Deans of Chester Cathedral, from its formation to the present
time:—

Thomas Clarke          1541
Henry Mann             1542
William Cliff          1547
Richard Walker         1558
John Pears             1567
R. Langworth           1571
R. Dorset              1579
Thomas Modesley        1580
John Rutter            1589
Wm. Barlow             1602
Henry Parry            1605
Thomas Mallory         1607
Wm. Nicholls           1644
Henry Bridgman         1660
James Arderne          1682
Lawrence Fogg          1691
Walter Offley          1718
Thomas Allen           1721
Thomas Brooke          1733
William Smith          1758
George Cotton          1780
Hugh Cholmondeley      1806
Robert Hodgson         1815
Peter Vaughan          1820
Edmund Coplestone      1826
Henry Philpotts        1828
George Davys           1830
F. Anson               1839

                          BISHOP—J. Graham, D.D.

                           DEAN—F. Anson, D.D.

                               ARCHDEACONS.

                       Ven. Isaac Wood, Middlewich
                        Ven. J. Jones, Liverpool.

                                 CANONS.

Rev. J. Slade, M.A.             Rev. T. Eaton, M.A.
Rev. G. B. Blomfield, M.A.      Rev. Temple Hillyard, M.A.

                              MINOR CANONS.

W. Harrison, M.A.         R. M. Smith, M.A.
F. E. Thurland, M.A.      H. Venables, M.A., Precentor.

                             HONORARY CANONS.

Rev. C. A. Thurlow, M.A.      Rev. Hugh Stowell, M.A.
Rev. Hugh McNeile, D.D.       Rev. W. Cooke, M.A.

                          _Organist_—Mr. Gunton.

The hours of service are—Week-day, morning, 7 and 10; afternoon, 4.
Sunday, morning, 11; afternoon, 4 o’clock.  During the winter months the
service begins at 3 in the afternoon.

Through the indefatigable energy of Dr. Anson, the present Dean, many
most important improvements have been introduced into the interior of
this noble edifice, which have added very much to its decoration and
general effect.  In 1843, the munificent sum of £4,000 was contributed
for the purpose of giving effect to the praiseworthy object of restoring
some portion of the ancient beauties of the Cathedral.  A new organ has
been erected, of great power and richness of tone, the top of which is
carved with tabernacle work, in unison with that of the choir.  The old
pews, which were sadly out of keeping with the rich Gothic woodwork of
the stalls, have been removed, and the choir has been new seated in the
Gothic style.

The whole of the choir has been vaulted, which has greatly contributed to
its improved appearance.  A great number of beautiful stained-glass
windows, principally the gifts of private families as obituary memorials,
have been introduced since the commencement of the improvements in 1843.
The large window of stained glass, at the west end, was presented by Mrs.
Hamilton, of Hoole, by whose liberality a splendid restoration of the
Lady Chapel has been effected.

The interior of the Cathedral excites a general feeling of admiration,
which the exterior fails to realize.



THE CHURCH OF ST. OSWALD’S,


as already mentioned, forms the south transept of the choir of Chester
Cathedral.  After the introduction of regular monks into the monastery of
St. Werburgh, anciently dedicated to the Holy Trinity and St. Oswald, the
name of this patron saint was retained by that part of the conventual
church which was set apart for the uses of the inhabitants of the parish,
within which the monastery was placed.  This part probably occupied the
site of that transept of the Cathedral which forms the present parish
church.  The name of St. Oswald does not, however, appear to have been
originally used for the parish.  In the licence of appropriation by
William Cornhall, Bishop of Coventry, it is called the parish church of
St. Werburgh.

It appears to have been subsequently called the Church of St. Oswald and
the Church of St. Werburgh indiscriminately.  It was founded in the ninth
century by Ethelfleda, Countess of Mercia.  So early as 1093, when Earl
Leofric introduced regular monks into the Cathedral, that part of it now
occupied by St. Oswald’s was set apart for the use of the parishioners,
as we have just stated.  The abbot and convent afterwards wishing to
re-attach it to the Cathedral, built for the parishioners a small chapel,
dedicated to St. Nicholas, in the spot where the Music Hall now stands;
but they do not appear to have been contented with their new place of
worship; for in 1488 we find, from Gastrel’s ‘Notitia,’ that a
“composition was made between the Abbot and the parishioners of St.
Oswald’s for their new church.”  They accordingly re-entered into the
south transept, which had been rebuilt by Abbot Ripley, and have ever
since used it as their parish church.

St. Oswald’s was formerly in a state of great dilapidation; and was only
separated from the aisle of the Cathedral by a slight wooden screen.  In
1827 it was thoroughly repaired; the whole was new flagged and pewed, a
new pulpit and reading desk added; the old gallery, which was at the west
side, taken down, and a new one erected at the south end.  The interior
was cut off from the aisle by a partition, erected by Dr. Coplestone when
Dean, who expended more than £1,000 in various improvements.

St. Oswald’s is a vicarage, in the gift of the Dean and Chapter of
Chester Cathedral.  The present vicar is the Rev. William Harrison, M.A.

              [Picture: St. John’s Church & Priory, Chester]



CHURCH OF ST. JOHN THE BAPTIST.


The church is situated without the city walls, a short distance from the
Newgate; it stands upon an elevation overhanging the north bank of the
Dee, and the churchyard commands a beautiful and extensive prospect.

This church, with its adjoining ruins, is the most interesting of the
ecclesiastical buildings of Chester.

The foundation of the church is ascribed by Webb to Ethelred, Ring of
Mercia, and stated, on the authority of Giraldus, to have taken place in
the year 689.  The MS. chronicle of St. Werburgh makes a similar
statement on the same authority; it is also adopted by the author of
‘Polycronicon,’ and thus quaintly recorded—

    “The year of grace six hundred fourscore nine,
    So saith my author, a Briton, Giraldus,
    King Etheldred, minding most the bliss of heaven,
    Edified a college church, notable and famous,
    In the suburbs of Chester, pleasant and beauteous,
    In the honour of God, and the Baptist St. John,
    With the help of Bishop Wulfrice, and good exhortation.”

This inscription is now affixed to a pillar on the north side of the
church.  With respect to its foundation by Ethelred, we find the
following curious passage, quoted from an early writer by King and
others:—“King Ethelred minding to build a church, was told that where he
should see a white hind there he should build a church; which white hind
he saw in the place where St. John’s Church now standeth, and in
remembrance whereof, his picture was placed in the wall of the said
church, which yet standeth on the side of the steeple, towards the west,
having a white hind in his hand.”

According to William of Malmsbury, St. John’s was repaired and richly
endowed by Leofric, Earl of Mercia, in 1057, and it is shortly afterwards
thus noticed in Doomsday Book:—“Ecclesia Sancti Johanius, in civitate
habét viii. domos, quietas ab omné consuetudine: una ex his est
matricularii ecclesiæ; aliæ sunt canonicorum.”  The seat of the See,
which for some centuries after the conquest fluctuated between Chester,
Coventry, and Lichfield, was, in 1075, fixed for a time in the Church of
St. John, by Peter, then Bishop, which may be taken as a sufficient proof
of the wealth and grandeur of the foundation, even at this early period.
The succeeding Bishop, Robert de Limesey, having removed the seat of the
See to Coventry, St. John’s returned to its former collegiate
establishment, but was long afterwards considered and denominated one of
the three Cathedrals of the diocese, and retained in its immediate
neighbourhood a palace of the Bishop, and the mansion of the Archdeacon
of Chester—the remains of its former importance.  At the dissolution in
1547, the college consisted of one dean, seven prebends, four vicars, a
clerk, and a sexton.  “In this church,” says Dr. Cowper, “was an ancient
rood, or image of wood, of such veneration, that in a deed dated March
27, 1311, confirmed by Walter Langton, the church was called the _Church
of the Holy Cross and St. John_.”  “There can be little doubt, on the
whole,” says Ormerod, “that some monastic foundation, dedicated to the
Holy Cross, had, previously to this, merged in the college of St. John.”
In 1468 the old steeple, which stood between the nave and the chancel,
fell in, and destroyed great part of the choir.  In 1470 the steeple was
rebuilt, and the whole church covered with lead at the expense of the
parishioners, to whom certain immunities were granted by the Dean on that
account.  In 1548, a commission was granted to certain gentlemen of
Cheshire to survey the colleges, &c., within the county; in virtue
whereof a return (now in the Augmentation Office) was made, wherein the
annual rent of the college of St. John, arising from lands, tithes, &c.,
is reckoned at £146 5s.  The church plate is estimated in the same return
at 465 ounces; the weight of the five bells, 4,000 lbs.; lead in and upon
the church, 78 tons; and goods and ornaments for the use of the clergy to
the value of £40 19s. 9d.  In 1572, the greater part of the central
steeple again fell in; and in 1574, part of the steeple at the west end
of the church also gave way, whereby great part of the church was
destroyed.  After being suffered to remain in a ruinous state for some
years, the parishioners obtained a grant of the church from Queen
Elizabeth in 1581, whereupon they repaired and reduced it to its present
size and form, by taking down the remains of the central steeple, and
cutting off the south and north transepts and all the chapels above the
choir.  In 1585, the Queen granted the impropriate rectory and advowson
to Sir Christopher Halton, by whom it was conveyed to Alexander King,
who, in 1587, conveyed it to Alexander Cotes, whose daughter brought it
by marriage to the family of the Sparkes, in 1597; in which family it
continued until the year 1810, when it was sold by their representative,
John Adams, Esq., to the late Marquis of Westminster, who, in 1813,
rebuilt the north and south transepts, and repaired the chancel, in which
he introduced a Gothic window over the altar.

“St. Johns, when entire,” says Pennant, “was a magnificent pile.  The
tower once stood in the centre, but falling down in 1574, was never
rebuilt.”  “The church,” says Ormerod, “was in the finest style of early
Norman architecture; it consisted originally of a nave and choir, with
side aisles, two transepts, and a central tower, &c.”

On each side of the chancel were added, at a later period, chapels in a
rich style of pointed Gothic, in which some exquisite specimens of shrine
work are yet remaining.

The nave and choir, fitted up and repaired in 1581, as before mentioned,
now form the parish church, in which public worship is celebrated.  Eight
arches, resting on pillars 5 feet 6 inches in circumference, with
capitals variously ornamented, separate the nave from the side aisles;
and above these are two rows of galleries, with pointed arches, springing
from light shafts.  Four massive composite pillars, which formerly
supported the central tower, still remain in the nave.  In the interior
are some interesting relics of the architecture of our Norman ancestors.

The belfry is detached from the church, at the north-west corner of which
it is situate.  It is a square tower, erected in the seventeenth century,
150 feet in height.  It is extremely lofty, and its sides are decorated
with pointed windows in a good style, figures placed in rich shrines,
strings of quatrefoils and rows of ornamental arches; in one of the
niches on the west side is placed a statue which has excited much
controversy.  It is much defaced by time and exposure to the weather.

At the east end of the church, as now rebuilt, stand the ruins of the
chapels above the choir, consisting of the outer walls, with the remains
of several windows of Gothic architecture; and the eastern wall,
containing a beautiful arched window, of the same style, but larger and
richer in ornament than the others.

Near the foot of the tower, on the north side of the church, is an
ancient porch, forming the principal entrance, in the sides of which are
two lancet arches, the entrance being under an acutely pointed arch, the
mouldings of which rest on a number of short shafts, which converge as
they retire inwards.

“Within this church,” says Ormerod, “was a chantry, dedicated to St.
Mary.”  Within the precincts of St. John’s were also Thorneton’s chantry,
the Chapel of St. Anne, which Piggott says, “in some deeds, is called the
‘_Monastery_ of St. Anne;’ was endowed with land and houses, some of
which now constitute the revenues of Northwich school:” there was also
the Chapel of St. James’s, which Lysons says was the old parish church;
in 1662 it is described as being then used as a stable.  It has long
since been entirely destroyed.  On the south wall of the churchyard was
an ancient building, called the “Anchorite’s Cell,” which is said to be
the spot where Earl Harold retired after the battle of Hastings, in 1066;
a monkish chronicle being extant, which denies the fact of his death in
that fight, and states that he lived for some time after at Chester, in
the disguise of a monk.  In 1770 two skeletons were discovered here in
coffin-shaped cavities, scooped out of the rock.  The fourteen panel
tables which are hung in various parts of the church, bearing the arms of
the deceased to whose memory they are placed, are said to be painted by
one of the Randle Holmes, the distinguished herald artists.  This noble
church is horridly disfigured by huge galleries and unsightly pews, for
the removal of which an effort is now making, as a prelude to a general
restoration of the sacred edifice.  The present vicar is the Rev. W. B.
Marsden, M.A.

          [Picture: Chancel ruins of St. John’s Church, Chester]



ST. PETER’S CHURCH.


This church stands exactly in the centre of the city, where the four
principal streets meet, and close to the ancient site of the high cross.
It consists of a nave and side aisles, divided from each other by three
pointed arches.  “The span of the arches, and the height of the
building,” says Ormerod, “are very disproportionate to the present size
of the interior, and give it the appearance of being a fragment of a much
larger building.”  In a square tower on the south-west side are eight
bells, cast in 1709, whereof six are a peal; on the treble is engraved,
“When you ring, I’ll sing.”

Pennant is of opinion, as we have before stated, that on this site
formerly stood the Roman Prætorium.  Tradition says that this church was
built by Ethelfleda, Countess of Mercia, and that it was originally
dedicated to St. Peter and St. Paul, at the time when the name of the
“mother church” was changed to the Holy Trinity and St. Oswald.
Bradshaw, the Monk, alluding thereto, says—

    “And the old church of St. Peter and Paul,
       By a general consent of the spirituality,
    With the help of the Duke most principal,
       Was translated into the midst of the said city.”

In Domesday it is noticed under its present name, “Templum Sancti Petri.”
In 1081 it was given by Robert de Rodeland to the Monks of St. Ebrulf, in
Normandy, by whom it was shortly afterwards resigned to the Abbot of St.
Werburgh.  In 1479 the steeple was rebuilt, on which occasion the parson,
and other inhabitants, ate a goose at the top of it, and flung the bones
into the four principal streets beneath.  In 1580 eight yards of the
spire of the steeple were new built.  A.D. 1637–40, the east end of the
church, and the south side from the window stools, was re-edificed, the
roof almost new leaded, most of the pews new made, all the rest repaired,
and all the aisles nagged.  At the dissolution, the patronage of St.
Peter was vested in the Dean and Chapter of Chester; it afterwards
reverted to the Crown, but is now solely in the gift of the Bishop.  The
spire of this church, having been injured by lightning, was taken down in
1780, and in 1787 the south side of the church was recased with stone.
The steeple was rebuilt, and a new clock was placed in it, in 1813; other
improvements in the interior have been subsequently made with good taste
and effect.  The Rev. John Watson is the rector.



THE CHURCH OF THE HOLY TRINITY


is situated on the north side of Watergate-street, adjoining the Custom
House.

All traces of the foundation and endowment of this church are buried in
remote antiquity.  The earliest evidence of its existence, now to be
found, is in a charter relative to the church of Rostherne, in the
twelfth century, amongst the witnesses to which is “Walterus Ecclesiæ
Sanctæ Trinitatis Presbyterus.”  The advowson was anciently vested in the
Barons of Montalt, now called Hawarden, with which barony it passed to
the Crown, by whom it was given to the Earls of Salisbury, from whom it
passed to the Stanleys of Lathom, whose representative, the Earl of
Derby, is the present patron.  In 1401, Henry, Prince of Wales and Earl
of Chester (afterwards Henry the Fifth), confirmed to the citizens of
Chester a charter, whereby they were relieved from payment of tithes for
the Roodeye to the parson of Trinity parish.  In 1679, the south and east
sides of this church, being in a ruinous state, were rebuilt.  The tower
was formerly surmounted by a remarkably light and elegant spire, 159 feet
in height.  This, however, from the perishable nature of its materials
and its exposed situation, required very frequent repairs, and about
seventy-five years ago the upper part was so frequently and severely
injured by storms, as to require rebuilding thrice in eight years.  In
1811 the whole structure of the spire was in such a state of decay, that
reasonable doubts were entertained of its safety, if allowed to remain;
it was therefore taken down, and the tower reduced to its present
altitude.  The burying ground adjoining this church having been found
inadequate to the increased population of the parish, a piece of ground,
to the eastward of the city gaol, was purchased in 1809, and converted to
that purpose, at an expense of £1,000.

The interior of this church consists of a nave, chancel, and side aisles,
divided from the nave by three pointed arches on the south side; but on
the north the arches have been removed, and their places supplied by iron
pillars.  A thorough repair took place in 1826, when a number of free
sittings were erected in the galleries.

Dr. Parnell, Archdeacon of Clogher, whose poems are familiar to every
person of taste and feeling, was buried in this church, October 24th,
1718, having died at Chester, on his way to Ireland.

There are several monuments worthy of attention.  Within the communion
rails lie the remains of Matthew Henry, the celebrated commentator, who
officiated in the Presbyterian chapel in Cook-street; there is a Latin
inscription to his memory on a brass plate.  The Rev. F. Ayckbown, M.A.,
is the rector.



ST. MARTIN’S CHURCH,


formerly called _St. Martins of the Ash_, stands at the west end of White
Friars and Cuppin-street.  It appears to have been an ancient foundation;
for it is mentioned in a deed, in the year 1250, wherein Bernard de
Trannuille releases to Philip le Clerk a rent of 12d. arising from
premises situate “near the Church of St. Martin in Chester.”  The old
church mentioned in this deed, having fallen into decay, was rebuilt in
1721, as we learn from an inscription on the front of the steeple.  The
open ground in front of this church bears the name of _Martin’s Ash_,
derived in all likelihood from the circumstance of an ash tree having
formerly stood on the spot.  The parish is now united to that of St.
Bridget, and the service in St. Martin’s is discontinued.



ST. MARY’S CHURCH,


anciently called _Ecclesia Sanctæ Mariæ de Castello_ and _Ecclesia Sanctæ
Mariæ super Montem_, but now _St. Mary’s on the Hill_, stands at the
upper end of Castle-street, at the extreme verge of the liberties of the
city.

Although the precise date of the foundation of this church cannot be
ascertained, yet it is not improbable that it was one of those founded
early in the twelfth century by Lucy, sister of Edwin, Earl of Mercia,
and widow of Randle de Meschines, Earl of Chester, a lady remarkable as a
benefactress to the “holy church,” even in that church-erecting and
endowing age.  At all events, St. Mary’s was gifted to the Abbey of St.
Werburgh, by Randle Gernons, Earl of Chester, son of the above-named
lady, in one of those fits of compunction which usually followed the acts
of violence into which his turbulence and ambition frequently led him.
Shortly after the dissolution, the Dean and Chapter of St. Werburgh
obtained a grant from the Crown of the rectory of St. Mary’s, which was
surrendered by Dean Cliffe in 1550, to Sir R. Cotton, by whose agent it
was sold for £100 to John Brereton, Esq., of Wettenhall, by whose heirs
it was again sold to the Wilbrahams of Dorfold, from whom it passed by
marriage to the Hills of Hough, in Wybunbury, from whom it was purchased
by the late Marquis of Westminster.

St. Mary’s consists of a nave, chancel, and side aisles, with a square
tower at the west end, used as a belfry.  The south aisle, called
_Troutbeck’s Chapel_, was erected by William Troutbeck, of Dunham, in the
fifteenth century.  This chapel is noticed in the ecclesiastical survey
taken by the Commissioners appointed by Henry the Eighth, and its annual
rents, arising from lands and tenements within the city of Chester, are
estimated at £5 6s.  In this chapel were many monuments of the founder’s
family, which, according to Holmes, “were thought to exceed anything of
the kind in England;” but these were destroyed, by the falling in of the
roof, in 1660.  In 1690, the parishioners having obtained a grant of the
site from the Duke of Shrewsbury, representative of the Troutbecks, built
thereon the present south aisle.  The north aisle was anciently called
the _Chapel of St. Catherine_.

The tower of St. Mary’s is only 50 feet high, its further elevation
having been objected to by the Governor of Chester Castle, when it was
repaired in 1715, lest it should command the castle-yard.

In this church are several monuments well worthy the attention of the
visitor.  Amongst these is one to the memory of Thomas Gamul, Recorder of
Chester, who died in 1613.  The deceased is represented in a recumbent
posture, with his wife on his right hand, and his only son in the
attitude of prayer at his knee: on the side of the tomb his three
daughters, who died in infancy, holding skeletons in their hands.  The
statues of this monument are of alabaster.  Another to the memory of
Philip Oldfield, of Bradwell, who died in 1616, represents him in the
costume of that age, leaning on his right side, with a roll of parchment
in his hand.  The slab is supported by kneeling figures of his four sons,
with their hands upon their sword hilts: at the head are figures of his
two daughters bearing shields.  In the north aisle are tablets to the
memory of different members of the family of Holmes, the celebrated
antiquaries.  Of this family, four successively bore the name of Randle.
The first, who was Sheriff of Chester in 1615, and Mayor in 1633, died in
1654; the second was Mayor of Chester in 1643, and died in 1659; the
third, author of the ‘Academic Armoury,’ was gentleman sewer to Charles
the Second, and Deputy Garter King of Arms, and died in 1699; and the
fourth was Deputy Norroy King of Arms, and died in 1707.  Of these four
Randle Holmes, the second and third were the celebrated antiquarian
collectors; and there are some compilations of a similar nature, brought
down to 1704, by the last.  Several stained-glass windows have lately
been introduced, the principal ones consisting of a memorial in honour of
the heroes of the 23rd regiment of Welsh Fusiliers, who fell at the
battle of the Alma in the Russian war: and another to the memory of the
late rector, the Rev. W. H. Massie, who was universally beloved, and who
effected great improvements in the church and parish.

St. Mary’s is a rectory, in the gift of the Marquis of Westminster.  The
present rector is the Rev. C. Boween, M.A.

There are Sunday evening lectures in this church, under the patronage of
the Bishop of the diocese.  They are supported by annual subscriptions,
aided by collections in the church.



ST. BRIDGET’S CHURCH.


The old church of St. Bridget, or St. Bride (now removed), was situate on
the west side of Bridge-street, exactly opposite to St. Michael’s.  There
exists no correct data on which to ascertain the time of its foundation,
which tradition attributes to Offa, King of Mercia, who reigned in the
end of the eighth century, about which time we are told that several
churches were founded in Chester.  There is, however, clear evidence,
from writings among the Harleian MSS., that in the twelfth century the
patronage of this church belonged to the Lords of Aldford, by one of
whom, in 1224, it was quitclaimed to Randle Blundeville.  From another
writing it appears that, in 1265, Simon, Abbot of St. Werburgh, in
consideration of certain grants and donations, made to him by Bertram de
Arneway, bound himself to maintain a chaplain to say mass for the soul of
John Arneway, before the altar of the Virgin in St. Bridget’s Church.
This church was formerly surrounded by a wall, which encroached
considerably upon Bridge-street, and the ground between this wall and the
church was used as a burying-place; but in 1785 the bodies were removed
to a piece of ground on the south of the church, and the street widened.
The church walls were refaced with freestone, and other repairs made at
the same time.  A gateway formerly crossed the street between St.
Bridget’s and St. Michael’s churches, dividing higher from lower
Bridge-street.  The old church of St. Bridget was taken down in 1827,
under the provisions of the New Bridge Act, in order to improve the
approach into the city, and the new church was erected on the north-west
side of the castle.  The ceremony of laying the foundation stone was
performed by the Right Rev. C. J. Blomfield, then Lord Bishop of the
diocese.  The length is about 90 feet, and the width 50, and the church
is calculated to contain 1,000 persons.  “It is rather a remarkable
circumstance,” says Hemingway, “that although St. Bridget’s parish is
wholly within the city, the ground occupied by the church and cemetery is
neither within the parish nor the city, but altogether within the county
palatine; but by a clause in the act, it is enacted, that after the
consecration, it shall ‘for all purposes, and to all intents whatsoever,
be deemed part of, and situated within the said parish of St. Bridget,
and within the said city of Chester.’”

The Rev. G. Salt, M.A., is the present incumbent.



ST. MICHAEL’S CHURCH


is situate on the east side of Bridge-street, opposite the end of
Grosvenor-street, leading to the New Bridge.  The time of its foundation
is uncertain, but it is supposed to have been connected with the
Monastery of St. Michael, which was given to the priory of Norton by
Roger de Lacy in a charter, subsequently confirmed by Henry the Second;
it is recorded by Bradshaw, that “the Monastery of St. Michael was burnt
by the great fire which happened on Mid-Lent Sunday in 1118, at eight of
the clock (all being in church), and consumed the greatest part of the
city.”  It is conjectured that this monastery was situated in
Bridge-street, in Rock’s-court, where, Dr. Williamson says, “before it
was converted into dwelling houses, one might have beheld fair,
churchlike windows, and other demonstrations of its being part of a
religious house.”  The chancel was rebuilt in 1496, and enlarged in 1678.
The old steeple, which was built in 1710, having fallen into decay, from
the perishable nature of the red sandstone, was taken down in 1849, and
the present handsome structure, built with white stone, was erected in
its place.  The south, east, and a portion of the north walls of the
church having also been found to be in a very defective state, they were
taken down in 1850; in fact, the church has been almost entirely rebuilt,
as none of the old walls remain, except the three internal arches, and a
part of the north wall.  The flat ceiling has been removed, but the nave
and chancel roofs being principally constructed of oak, and in a good
state of preservation, have been retained; they have, however, been
re-slated.  The north chancel has been entirely rebuilt and new roofed.
The north aisle of the nave is divided from the body of the church by
three pointed arches springing from octagonal columns, the capitals being
ornamented with quatrefoils.  The interior of the old building was very
inconvenient, unsightly, and dilapidated, but it is now completely
restored in proper ecclesiastical style.  The chancel is paved with
beautiful tiles, those within the communion rails being liberally given
by Mr. Minton.  Each compartment of the five chancel windows is
surrounded with a neat border of stained glass.  The style of
architecture adopted in the restoration of the church is the transition
from the decorated to the perpendicular, that being considered as best
suited to those portions of the old building which are retained.  Great
credit is due to Mr. James Harrison, the architect, for the very great
skill and judgment he has displayed in the restoration of the church.
The total cost was about £1,700, of which the parishioners borrowed £500
on the security of the church rates; the remaining sum was raised by
subscription.  Besides many smaller bequests from different individuals,
this parish enjoys, under the will of Dr. Robert Oldfield, dated 24th of
April, 1695, “two-thirds of Dunham Hall, and other lands and messuages at
Dunham-on-the-Hill, together with lands at Boughton, for the purpose of
paying £20 a year to the minister, provided he hold no other preferment,
and of binding poor boys apprentices born in that parish, and of
maintaining one or more poor boys, who should be apt to learn, at the
University.”  Owing to proper objects not having every year presented
themselves, the revenues have accumulated, and with the bequeathed
property now produce an annual rent of upwards of £400.  St. Michael’s is
a perpetual curacy, in the gift of the Bishop of Chester.  The present
officiating minister is the Rev. J. F. Hewson.



CHRIST CHURCH


is situated in a thickly inhabited district called Newtown; the rapid
increase in the population of this locality rendering additional church
accommodation necessary, the present edifice was erected to supply the
need.  It was consecrated on October 23, 1838.  The cost was £3,390
(including £1,000 for endowment, £100 for repair fund, &c.)  The Rev. W.
Gibson, formerly rector of St. Bride’s, Chester, and now rector of
Fawley, Hampshire, gave £1,425; the then Bishop of Chester (Dr. Sumner),
the Rev. Chancellor Raikes, and Miss Rowe, £100 each; H. Raikes, Esq.,
£55; the late General Beckwith, £50; W. Wardell, Esq., £50; the Diocesan
Church Building Society, £500.  The church is built in the early English
style of architecture.  The Rev. R. D. Thomas is the present incumbent.



ST. PAUL’S CHURCH,


the most unsightly church in England probably, is situated near to Barrel
Well, Boughton, and was built by public subscription, under the patronage
of Bishop Blomfield and Bishop Sumner.  It was erected in 1830, at the
cost of about £2,000.  It is capable of seating about 800 persons; 400
free sittings being appropriated for the poor.  There is no endowment for
the church, the income of the minister being derived from the pew rents.
The present incumbent is the Rev. J. Gaman, M.A.



ST. OLAVE’S CHURCH


is situated on the east side of Lower Bridge-street, opposite
Castle-street.  It is a small, oblong structure, in outward appearance
much resembling a barn.  This church is of great antiquity, having been
erected before the Norman Conquest.  In the eleventh century it was
possessed by the Botelars, by whom it was given, with two houses in the
Market-place, to the Abbey of St. Werburgh, in 1101.

After the great civil war, St. Olave’s fell into disuse as a place of
public worship, being only employed for baptisms and burials, on which
occasions the minister of St. Michael’s officiated.  It was, however,
re-opened as a parish church about the middle of last century, and
continued so until the year 1841, when service in the church was
discontinued, and the parish united with that of St. Michael’s.



LITTLE ST. JOHN’S.


We refer the reader to the notice we have already given of this ancient
hospital and chapel in a former page.  The present incumbent is the Rev.
William Clarke, B.D.



DISSENTING PLACES OF WORSHIP.


THE UNITARIAN CHAPEL


claims priority of notice, as being the first dissenting place of worship
in Chester.  The following succinct sketch of the history of this
building is taken from Pigott’s ‘History of Chester:’—

    “The Unitarian chapel is a large brick building, with a burial ground
    in front, situated between Crook-lane and Trinity-lane, having an
    entrance from each of those streets, and is generally called
    Crook’s-lane Chapel.  It was built in 1700 by a large, flourishing,
    respectable society, which had been formed in 1687 by the celebrated
    Matthew Henry, son of the learned, pious, and laborious Philip Henry,
    one of the ejected ministers.  In the register book belonging to the
    congregation of this place there is a short account of the rise,
    progress, and transactions of the society, written by Mr. Henry in
    1710, being the twenty-third year of his ministry.  From this
    account, it appears that in 1682 there were three dissenting
    congregations in Chester, which had been founded by Mr. William Cook,
    Mr. Ralph Hall, and Mr. John Harvey, ministers of the Established
    Church, who had been ejected from their respective livings on account
    of their non-compliance with the Act of Uniformity.  After the death
    of Mr. Cook and Mr. Hall, their congregations were entirely broken up
    and dispersed by the persecutions of the times; but such of them as
    continued dissenters occasionally held meetings at each other’s
    houses, or joined Mr. Harvey’s congregation, which assembled at his
    house in a private manner, in order to avoid the penalties which were
    then in force against the Nonconformists.  James the Second, under
    the pretence of universal toleration, but with a view to the
    establishment of popery, granted them the liberty of public worship,
    of which they had been deprived in the latter part of the reign of
    Charles the Second.  It was at this time that Mr. Henry, who began
    his ministry in Chester, collected the remains of the congregation of
    Mr. Cook and Mr. Hall, and opened a meeting in White Friars’-lane.
    Mr. Harvey, who had been ejected from Wallasey, in Cheshire,
    continued to preside over a dissenting congregation in Bridge-street
    for thirteen years after toleration was granted; he died November,
    1699; he was succeeded by his son, who resigned in 1706, on account
    of ill-health.  His congregation, which was large and opulent, was
    united to that of Mr. Henry, and in 1707 a large gallery was built on
    the south side of Crook’s-lane meeting-house for their better
    accommodation.  Thus the three original nonconformist societies were
    united in one, under the pastoral care of Mr. Henry, who was then the
    only dissenting minister in Chester.”

Mr. Henry removed from Chester to Hackney in 1713, and died of apoplexy,
at Nantwich, where he had been on a visit to his friends, in June, 1714,
in the 52nd year of his age, and was buried in Trinity Church in this
city.  His exposition of the Bible has gone through very many editions,
and is still in great repute.  Mr. John Gardiner succeeded Mr. Henry in
1713, and held his appointment for more than half a century.  During the
latter years of his ministry, his religious opinions appear to have
undergone a decided change, departing very much from the doctrines
maintained by Mr. Henry, which gradually prepared the way for the full
development of Unitarianism in the place by his successor, Mr. Chidlaw,
who was an avowed believer and advocate of the tenets peculiar to that
system of Socinian doctrine.  The present minister is the Rev. James
Macdonald.


Independent Chapel.


This place of worship is situated on the west side of Queen-street.  It
is a handsome brick building, having a chaste stone front, with covered
portico, and pillars of the Grecian Doric order.  It has galleries on
three sides, and will accommodate about 1,200 persons.  It contains also
a good organ.  The founders of this chapel were seceders from the
Presbyterian congregation in Crook-street, in consequence of a departure
from what they held as the principles of a sound faith, as we have
already noticed.  For some years they worshipped in a large room in
Commonhall-street, afterwards occupied by Mr. Wilcoxon’s congregation.
They formed themselves into a church in 1772, when the Rev. Wm. Armitage
was chosen the pastor.  The chapel in Queen-street was erected in 1777;
it was very much enlarged in 1838, when great improvements were made in
the arrangements of the interior.  At the same time a spacious wing was
added to the building, which is used as a lecture-room and as a sabbath
school for girls: underneath the lecture-room is a commodious sabbath
school for boys.  In addition to the Sunday schools in Queen-street,
there are also three branch schools in the suburbs of the city, which are
supported by the congregation.  The present minister is the Rev. C.
Chapman.


WESLEYAN METHODIST CHAPEL.
(OLD CONNEXION.)


This chapel (says Hemingway) was erected in 1811; it is a large,
well-built, handsome structure, with a semicircular front, and two
entrances.  It is galleried on three sides, and behind the pulpit is a
large orchestra for the accommodation of singers, where there is also a
well-toned organ.  The introduction of Methodism into this city occurred
about the year 1750, and the first preacher who visited the neighbourhood
was a Mr. John Bennett.  He commenced his labours at Huntington Hall, in
the neighbourhood, the residence of Mr. George Cotton; from thence the
preaching was removed to the house of Mr. Richard Jones, in Love-lane,
within the city, where a society was first formed; the house soon became
too small for them, the society therefore procured and fitted up a
capacious barn in Martin’s Ash, from which time they were regularly
supplied with travelling preachers, and where the Rev. John Wesley
frequently visited them, in his annual excursions.  After remaining in
Martin’s Ash for about twelve years, they had sufficient credit to obtain
£520 upon bond, with which they erected, in 1765, the Octagon Chapel in
Foregate-street, which they continued to occupy until their removal to
St. John-street.  The Wesleyans have also built commodious schoolrooms,
which are very numerously attended.  The resident ministers are the Rev.
T. Brooks and the Rev. J. E. Cooke.

   [Picture: Independent Chapel & Lecture Rooms, Queen Street, Chester]


WESLEYAN METHODIST CHAPEL.
(NEW CONNEXION.)


The New Connexion Methodists seceded from the old society on some points
respecting the management of the funds, throwing open their financial
matters to the knowledge and supervision of the people, and the general
government of their societies.  They have a large place of worship in
Pepper-street, which is fronted with stone, and supported by four
Corinthian pillars.  The ministers are itinerant, and receive their
appointment from the annual conference.


THE OCTAGON CHAPEL


is situated in Foregate-street, and, as already stated, was built in
1765, by the Wesleyan Methodists.  Upon their removal to St. John-street,
it was purchased, and has since that time been occupied by its present
possessors.  The congregation was collected by the labours of the late
Rev. P. Oliver, a clergyman of the Established Church, who embraced the
doctrines of the celebrated Mr. Whitefield.  This gentleman (says
Hemingway, from whom we quote) converted some outbuildings near his house
in Boughton into a chapel, where he officiated until his death without
any other reward than the gratification of diffusing among his poor
neighbours, according to the best of his judgment, the spirit and
principles of evangelical truth.  At his death he bequeathed the chapel
to his congregation for a term of years; but upon their removal to the
Octagon, they sold their interest in it, and it has since been
occasionally used as a place of worship by the Independents of
Queen-street.  The congregation at the Octagon is in connection with the
societies which were under the patronage of the late Countess of
Huntingdon.  The present minister is the Rev. W. Evans.


THE BAPTIST CHAPEL


is situated in Hamilton-place; it is a small brick building, erected in
1806.


THE WELSH CALVINISTIC CHAPEL


stands on the north side of Commonhall-street; it was opened for public
service on the 12th November, 1820.  The public service is conducted in
the Welsh language.


COMMONHALL STREET


was erected in 1841, by the congregation of the late Mr. Jonathan
Wilcoxon, who officiated in an adjoining room, without pecuniary
emolument, for thirty-seven years.  After his death the congregation
united themselves with the Independents.


THE QUAKERS’ MEETING HOUSE


is a plain building, standing on the east side of Frodsham-street.  It is
capable of containing several hundred persons, and has a burial ground in
front; it is one of the oldest dissenting places of worship now existing
in Chester.  Clarkson, in his ‘Memoirs of William Penn,’ says, “Among the
places he (William Penn) visited in Cheshire, was Chester itself.  The
king (James the Second), who was then travelling, arriving there at the
same time, went to the _Meeting House_ of the Quakers to hear him
preach.”  In George Fox’s journal, there is an entry which proves that
the Quakers have existed as a distinct society in Chester for about 200
years.  Under date 1657, he writes: “From Wrexham we came to west
Chester, and it being the fair time, we staid there awhile and _visited
Friends_.”  The resident members of this society are now very few, and
the service is seldom performed.


THE PRIMITIVE METHODISTS


have a small chapel in Steam-Mill-street, erected about the year 1825,
and the members of the society appear to be on the increase.


THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHAPEL


is situated on the west side of Queen-street.  It is a small but good
brick building, with a Doric portico, supported by four light stone
pillars in front, and was built in 1799.  The chapel is now found to be
too small for the congregation, and the erection of a larger edifice is
contemplated, when the requisite funds can be provided.  The Rev. J.
Carberry is the present priest in residence.


THE PRESBYTERIAN CHAPEL


is situated in Pepper-street.  It was erected, in 1827, by the Baptists,
but the congregation becoming very small, it was closed some years ago.
In 1846 it was reopened for Presbyterian worship, and has continued to be
occupied by a small but respectable society.  The Rev. W. Hunter is the
minister.



ENDOWED AND CHARITABLE SCHOOLS.


THE KING’S SCHOOL.


This school was founded by King Henry the Eighth, in the thirty-sixth
year of his reign, for twenty-four boys to receive £3 4s. each, who are
appointed by the Dean and Chapter.  By the charter it is ordained, “that
there shall ever be in our church of Chester twenty-four boys, poor and
friendless, to be maintained out of the income of our church, of good
capacities and given to learning if possible; which, however, we would
not have admitted before they can read and write, and somewhat understand
the rudiments of grammar; and this at the discretion of the Dean and Head
Master.  And these boys we will have maintained at the expense of our
church until they have made some tolerable proficiency in the Latin
grammar, and have been taught to write and speak Latin, for which end
they are allowed the term of four years, or, if the Dean or Head Master
see cause, of five and no more.  But we order that no one, unless he be a
chorister of our church, be elected a poor scholar that is under the age
of nine years.”  Some important alterations have recently been made in
the management of the school, which have very considerably increased its
efficiency.  We are happy to find that the inhabitants of Chester are
availing themselves of the great advantages provided by this excellent
institution.  The course of instruction has been made such as to qualify
the scholars for any of the literary professions or commercial pursuits,
embracing as it does all the elements of a sound mathematical, classical,
and general education.  The Head Master is the Rev. J. Harris, M.A.  The
chorister boys are educated apart, by a master expressly appointed for
that purpose by the Dean and Chapter.


THE DIOCESAN SCHOOL.


This institution was established, January 2, 1812, by public
subscription, under the patronage of the Bishop of Chester.  It is
situated on the south side of the top of George-street, is 80 feet long
by 33 wide, and is capable of accommodating 400 children.  It is
supported by benefactions and annual subscriptions, and the institution
is in a most prosperous condition; its object is to promote a good
education among the children of the poor.  The present master is Mr.
Beswick, who is efficiently fulfilling the duties of his office.

There are also the Blue Coat School, established by Bishop Stratford, in
1700; the Blue Girls’ School, established in 1721; Infant schools,
established in 1825, under the patronage of Bishop Blomfield; Diocesan
Training College, erected in 1742, of which the Principal is the Rev.
Arthur Rigg, M.A.


CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS.


The General Infirmary; Chester Humane Society; The Female Penitentiary;
Female House of Refuge.




CHAPTER VI.
EATON HALL.


BEFORE the visitor leaves Chester, we have no doubt he will be induced to
visit Eaton Hall, the princely mansion of the Marquis of Westminster,
which is situated in a beautiful park, about three miles to the south of
Chester.  The principal approach to the house is through the Chester
gateway—a fine building, situated within a short distance of the city.
The design is a spirited copy of St. Augustine’s Abbey Gate, Canterbury,
by T. Jones, Esq., architect, of Chester, who has added appropriate wings
and wing walls, after the style of architecture in the thirteenth
century.  The approach is from a noble esplanade, about 200 feet long by
100 feet broad, at the further end of which the lodge is entered through
a pointed arch and groining, enriched with groups of very delicate
foliage.  Each side of the archway is defended by an octagonal tower, 50
feet high, rising about 12 feet above the centre of the edifice.  The
lower parts of the towers, with the wings, are comparatively plain; the
centre of them is enriched with niches, surmounted by bunches of foliage
exquisitely carved; the upper part is richly panelled and pierced, which,
combined with the battlements, produces a light effect.  The middle,
above the archway and between the towers, is enriched with two windows,
surrounded by elegant mouldings, with a central niche containing the
Westminster arms, supported by the talbots in grand relief.  Above the
windows are a series of grotesque heads and fretwork, surrounded with an
enriched battlement.  The sides of the upper part are carried through in
the same style, but not so highly enriched.  The lodge or wing portions
have a window in front, surmounted with a cornice and an appropriate
battlement, having angular buttresses.  The inner front on the Eaton side
is ornamented in the same manner.  To the sides are attached wing walls,
extending 60 feet, pierced with loopholes and embattled, forming a grand
_tout ensemble_.

The present magnificent edifice, the designs for which were furnished by
Porden, was erected upon the site of the old hall (a stately brick
mansion, built by Sir John Vanburgh, taken down in 1803), and is
considered the most splendid modern specimen of the pointed Gothic in the
kingdom.  Although in the general design the florid Gothic order of the
time of Edward the Third has been followed, the architect has, in parts,
not only availed himself of the low Tudor arch, but has adopted the
peculiar style of any period suitable to his purpose, and has made
subservient to modern domestic convenience the rich and varied forms in
which our ancient ecclesiastical architecture abounds.  The walls,
battlements, and pinnacles of the building are constructed of stone of a
light and beautiful colour, brought from Delamere Forest; and round the
turrets and in various parts of the parapets are shields, charged in
relief with the heraldic achievements of the house of Grosvenor, and of
other ancient families with whom they are allied.  The building consists
of a centre and two wings, the latter differing from each other somewhat
in design; of these, that to the south, composed of two compartments, is
the more beautiful; this wing is oblong and angular, with four octagonal
turrets at the corners, buttresses at the sides, and having the embattled
parapets surmounted with pinnacles; the decorations are rich to
profusion, but every part accords with the original plan.  The eastern
and western fronts agree in their general form and proportions, but the
former possesses the greater number of minute decorations.  In the front
a cloister extends along the entire length between the two spacious
windows of the dining and drawing rooms, and conducts to the terrace:
from the terrace, which is 350 feet long, the view is eminently
beautiful.  The groves and gardens, with the conservatory, form the
foreground; beyond them is seen the noble inlet of the Dee, and a
charming extensive landscape fills up the distance.  The view from the
gardens embraces the south or library wing, but the opposite extremity is
partly hidden by the trees; beyond it, but apparently mingling with the
turrets and pinnacles, is seen a lofty octagonal clock-tower, connected
by flying buttresses with four slender shafts on a square basement; it is
attached to part of the stable court, which recedes from the line of the
east front, and which is of great extent.

The principal entrance is on the western front, under a lofty portico,
the clustered pillars of which support a beautifully groined ceiling;
from this a flight of steps leads to a pair of massive bronzed doors,
admitting to the grand entrance hall, which is elegant and lofty,
occupying the height of two stories; it is 41 feet long and 31 feet in
breadth, and has a groined ceiling, embellished with the armorial
bearings of the house of Grosvenor, and other devices in the bosses that
cover the juncture of the ribs.  The branching compartments terminate in
a rich centre-piece, from which is suspended a beautiful lamp, which,
when lighted, gives the pavement, composed of the choicest marbles, a
gorgeous effect: the floor was laid down at a cost of 1,600 guineas.  The
screen at the end of the hall is decorated with shields of arms, and
consists of five arches, which support a gallery connecting the sleeping
apartments on the north and south sides of the house, which are separated
by the elevation of the hall.  In lofty canopied recesses at the sides of
the hall, are four complete suits of ancient armour; and beneath the
gallery two open arches, to the right and left, conduct to the grand
staircase and the state bed-room.  Through a pair of massive, richly
carved, mahogany folding-doors, which cost 100 guineas each, the visitor
is ushered into the saloon, which forms the centre of a suite of
apartments of unequalled beauty and magnificence.  The groined and
fretted ceilings of these rooms, decorated with the endless ramifications
of fanwork tracery and the most beautiful varieties of Gothic foliage,
brilliant in colour, and rich with the herald’s skill, yet chastened by
the direction of an exquisite taste, and subdued by the propriety of the
arrangement—the walls beautified in the richest style of decoration,
receiving and reflecting still more glowing hues as the sunbeams stream
through the painted glass with which the windows are profusely
ornamented—the paintings of the highest excellence—the chandeliers of
elaborate workmanship—the gorgeous furniture corresponding with the
house—the cabinets of Mosaic ivory and pearl—the golden vases sparkling
in the niche—in short, the whole finishing and furnishing of these
apartments constitute a combination of costliness and good taste which
justly commands the admiration of every visitor.

The _saloon_ is a splendid apartment; it is a square of 30 feet, formed
into an octagon by arches across the angles, which give to the vaultings
a beautiful form; there are three windows, enriched with tracery, and
nearly filled with painted glass, through which a subdued light is
admitted, giving to the Gothic character of the saloon a very rich and
striking effect.  The elegant fan tracery of the ceiling is supported by
twelve slender columns in the angles and sides; the Roman circle, forming
the centre, is composed of numerous mouldings, and ornamented with fruit
and foliage.  The stained glass windows represent the heraldic
achievements of the noble house of Grosvenor, with those of the ancient
families with whom they have formed alliances; and in the upper
compartments are six full-length figures of William the Conqueror; Sir
Gilbert le Grosvenor, his companion at the time of the Norman invasion,
and the nephew of Hugh Lupus; the lady of Sir Gilbert; Sir Robert le
Grosvenor, the Crusader; Joan Lady Grosvenor, heiress of Eaton; and Odo,
Bishop of Bayeux, uncle of the Conqueror.  The furniture of the room is
chaste, both in colour and design.  The chimney-piece is of statuary
marble, and opposite to it is an organ, both highly adorned.  This room
has recently been richly decorated in the Alhambresque style, by Mr. John
Morris of Chester; each panel being most beautifully embellished with
landscapes.

The ante-rooms, though of similar proportions, are differently decorated;
the ceiling of each is covered with a delicate pattern of tracery, and
both are superbly furnished.  The windows are composed of stained glass,
representing the figures and arms of six of the Earls of Chester.

The ante-dining-room is a handsome apartment, recently decorated in the
Alhambresque style, by Mr. Morris, though with less elaborate finish than
the saloon.

The dining-room is well proportioned, being 50 feet by 37 feet.  The
simplicity of its design is not owing to any deficiency of ornament; on
the contrary, its several enrichments are gorgeous; but in comparison
with the other state apartments, which are profusely decorated, it is
characterized by a simplicity peculiarly elegant.  Springing from the
corners of the room, four ribs extend their ramified tracery over the
ceiling, in the centre of which their borders of wreathed foliage unite,
and thence from a richly carved boss is suspended a large and noble
chandelier.  The sideboard stands in an arched and highly enriched
recess, and placed at each end of the room are two canopied niches,
containing statues by _Westmacott_.  At the lower end are those of Sir
Robert le Grosvenor, who distinguished himself in the crusades, and of
Mary, Lady Grosvenor at the time of the Revolution.  Those at the upper
end of the room represent Sir Gilbert le Grosvenor, who came over from
France at the time of the Norman invasion, with his uncle, Hugh Lupus,
and Joan or Jane Lady Grosvenor, heiress of Eaton in the reign of Edward
the Fourth.  The room contains full-length portraits of the late Marquis
and Marchioness of Westminster, by _Jackson_, _R.A._; Abigail meeting
David, by _Rubens_; and the Judgment of Paris, after Rubens, by _Peters_.
The walls of the dining-room are richly ornamented.

The ante-drawing-room is very elegant; its decorations, in the
Alhambresque style, are peculiarly rich.  It contains three most
beautiful bookcases, chaste in design and exquisitely finished.

The drawing-room has four magnificent niches, and a noble window with a
lofty pointed arch and tracery of rich and beautiful forms, adorned with
stained glass.  It is placed at the end opposite the entrance, and
commands a fine prospect, the inlet of the Dee forming a conspicuous
object in the landscape.  The pattern of the ceiling, which is decorated
with compartments numerously subdivided and intersected, is formed in
four divisions issuing from clustered pillars with foliated capitals, and
united in the centre to an hexagonal frame, elaborately reticulated, from
which issues a pendant of foliage sustaining a superb chandelier of
crystal.  The number and variety of the carved knots and foliage add to
the beauty of the ceiling; but the decorations that increase its effect,
and are indeed its most prominent attractions, are the shields on which
the heraldic achievements of the various branches of the Grosvenor family
are emblazoned.  The pale hue of the ceiling, the gorgeous decorations in
the centre, and the rich glow of the crimson velvet with which the walls
of this noble apartment are covered, all combine to render it a scene of
unsurpassed magnificence.  Corresponding in costly embellishment with its
architecture is the furniture, of blue satin, fringed with yellow silk,
crimson velvet, and damask satin.  Over the chimney-piece, which is
carved in statuary marble, is a lofty mirror in an arched frame,
sufficiently broad to admit a pattern of tracery, on the compartments of
which crimson velvet is introduced with happy effect.  This splendid
apartment contains the following pictures:—Judith with the head of
Holofernes, _Guercino_—Reuben showing to Jacob the bloody garment of his
son Joseph, also by _Guercino_—Antiochus and Stratonice, _Pietro de
Cortona_—Christ and the Woman of Samaria, _Mignard_—Jacob blessing
Ephraim and Manasseh, _West_—Elijah raising the Widow’s Son, also by
_West_.

The library comprehends the whole of the south wing, and is the most
spacious room in the mansion; it varies in breadth, but is 120 feet long.
The bookcases are of rich carved oak, and the windows are ornamented with
tracery and stained glass.  When the door is thrown open, the view from
the further end of the library is continued through the vaulted corridor
at the opposite extremity of the house, a length of 480 feet.  A very
rare piece of antiquity is preserved in the library, it is a gold torque,
an ornament of dignity worn by the ancient Britons; it is wreathed, the
rods are linked together in a circle, and it measures 10 or 11 inches in
diameter.  The library contains many most valuable and rare books and
MSS., among which may be mentioned—a copy of the chronicle of Henry of
Huntingdon, in which is a curious drawing of the entry of King Stephen
into Lincoln; an illuminated MS. on vellum, containing the proceedings of
the celebrated suit of arms between Scroope and Grosvenor; and (among
other Cheshire MSS.) one volume of collections, containing a transcript
of a large portion of the celebrated and lost record, distinguished by
the name of “The Cheshire Doomsday;” also the confirmation charter of
Chester Cathedral, by the second Ranulf, surnamed De Gernon or Gernons,
Earl of Chester, in which the grant of Hugh Lupus is recapitulated.

The great staircase is very richly decorated: at the top of the first
flight of stairs are three niches with statues.  On the opposite side, at
the foot of the stairs, is an arcade supporting the upper floor; and from
these arches, which have open spandrils, the best view of this
magnificent staircase is obtained.

The state bed-room is an elegant apartment; the ceiling is vaulted, and
the bed is of mahogany, and groined; its principal carved ornaments
appear on clustered pillars, detached from the corners.  The sofas are of
blue satin, in richly carved and gilt frames, and the other seats are
covered in finely-wrought needlework of various colours.  Over the
chimney-piece is a mirror, the frame of which is composed of
handsomely-clustered pillars, pinnacles, and crocketed canopies, the
whole being richly decorated with gilding, and minutely carved.

The tenants’ hall is under the library, and corresponds with it in
extent.  The windows are enriched with tracery, and four massive
clustered pillars sustain the arches and groins of the ceding, which is
remarkably flat, when the breadth of its span is taken into
consideration.

The chapel is a small, beautifully-proportioned edifice.  The windows are
beautifully ornamented with stained glass, the work of Mr. Ballantine, of
Edinburgh.

The east front of the hall is adorned with a raised terrace, from whence,
sloping to an extensive piece of water, and intersected by walks, extend
the flower gardens and pleasure grounds, which cover a space of 50 acres.
The extensive pleasure grounds and gardens are laid out with admirable
taste; the conservatory, recently erected, is a most beautiful
construction, and forms an attractive object.  At the termination of a
fine gravel walk, and opposite to the conservatory, a Gothic temple has
been built for the reception of a Roman altar, discovered near Chester,
1821.  The Mosaic pavement of the temple was brought from a palace of the
Emperor Tiberius, in the island of Caprie, by Lord Robert Grosvenor.

The stables, which form a large quadrangle on the north side of the hall,
are erected in a style of architecture correspondent with that of the
house, and are separated from it by a small shrubbery.

An elegant iron bridge of 150 feet span, crossing the river Dee, which
runs through a part of the grounds, is likewise a real embellishment to
the landscape.  This bridge is exceedingly ornamental; it was erected by
Hazledine, at an expense of about £8,000.  From each point by which Eaton
Hall is approached, it presents a picture of unusual architectural
grandeur: the scenery by which the hall is surrounded heightens the
effect; westward, the view embraces the mountains of Wales; and to the
east appear the Peckforton hills, with the bold rock on which stand the
ruins of Beeston Castle.  The river Dee, winding in various directions,
imparts great beauty to the varied and extensive landscape.

The noble house of Grosvenor traces its descent through a long line of
illustrious ancestors, who flourished in Normandy with dignity and
splendour, from the time it was created a sovereign Dukedom, in the year
912, to the conquest of England in 1066, always ranking with the first
nobles, and having had the government of many castles and strongholds in
that Duchy.  The founder of this ancient house was uncle of Rollo, the
famous Dane, and was one of the principal commanders who, in the year
876, accompanied him in his invasion of England.  William, seventh Duke
of Normandy, at the time of his descent upon England, in 1066, was
accompanied by his twin brother Robert, afterwards Earl of Cornwall, and
Odo, Bishop of Bayeux, afterwards Earl of Kent; he had also, for his
immediate attendants, his nephew, Hugh Lupus, afterwards Earl of Chester,
and Gilbert le Grosvenor, nephew to Hugh.

The present Marquis succeeded to the title in 1845, and is the
twenty-second in descent from Gilbert le Grosvenor, the companion in arms
of William the Conqueror.  His lordship, who holds the office of
Lord-Lieutenant of Cheshire, married, in 1819, Elizabeth Mary, youngest
daughter of the Duke of Sutherland, and has, with other issue, a son and
heir, Hugh Lupus, Earl Grosvenor, one of the representatives in
Parliament for Chester, for which so many members of this illustrious
house have been elected.

Admission to visit Eaton Hall can only be obtained by tickets, which may
be had of the principal booksellers, and at the hotels, at fixed prices;
the proceeds being distributed by the Marquis of Westminster to public
charities.

For further particulars respecting Eaton Hall, see “Hicklin’s Guide to
Eaton Hall,” price 1s., published by Hugh Roberts, Eastgate Row, Chester.



ECCLESTON


is a beautiful little village, about two miles from Chester, much
resorted to by the inhabitants of that city, and by strangers, from its
vicinity to Eaton Hall.  The chief object of attraction is the church,
built in 1810 by the late Marquis of Westminster.  The interior of the
church is chaste and handsome; in the north transept is the mausoleum of
the Eaton family, and opposite to it their pew: over the altar is a fine
painting, by Westall, of the Dead Christ.




CHAPTER VII.
THE GENERAL RAILWAY STATION


is situated in Flookersbrook, and is the terminus of five different lines
of railway—viz., the London and North Western; the Chester and Holyhead;
the Chester and Mold; the Birkenhead, Lancashire, and Cheshire Junction;
and the Great Western: four of which companies contributed, in rateable
proportions, towards the erection of the building.  It is one of the most
extensive railway establishments in the kingdom, and the works comprise a
large and elegant passenger and arrival shed, with all suitable offices,
and adjoining which is a most commodious spare carriage shed, a goods
depôt, gas works, water works, and three engine sheds.  The whole was
designed by C. H. Wild, Esq., C.E., and Mr. Thompson, of London, and
carried out under the supervision of Robert Stephenson, Esq., C.E., M.P.

_The Passenger Shed_ occupies a space of ground nearly a quarter of a
mile in length, and presents to the city an elegant façade 1,010 feet
long, or a frontage, including the house and carriage landings, of 1,160
feet.  It is built of dark-coloured bricks, relieved with copings and
facings of Stourton stone.  At each end of the station, and projecting
from the main building, there is a shed for the arrival of trains, each
290 feet long by 24 feet broad, covered with an iron roof; in these sheds
cabs and omnibuses await the arrival of all trains.

On the inner side of the building is the General Departure Platform,
extending 740 feet in length by 20 feet in width; this and three lines of
rails is covered with an exceedingly chaste and elegant iron roof, of 60
feet span, designed and carried out by C. H. Wild, Esq., C.E.  Behind
this shed again, but visible from the general platform through the
arches, is the spare carriage shed, 600 feet long by 52 feet broad.  The
whole arrangements of the buildings are admirably adapted to carry on,
with comfort to the public and with facility to the _employés_, the
immense business that has so suddenly been brought to the city by the
convergence of so many railways at this point.

_The Goods Depôt_ is situated immediately behind the passengers’
building, and fully accords with it in style.  It consists of a shed, 180
feet long and 120 feet wide, with four railway entrances; and containing
three platforms or decks, furnished with 18 cranes and light weighing
machines, and the waggons are run alongside the decks to receive or
discharge their loads.

The extent of land purchased by the general station committee for station
purposes is about 75 acres; and within the station precincts there are
more than 7 miles of railway line, with 51 turntables.  The gross cost of
the land and buildings has been about £240,000.  A spacious hotel will
soon be erected on the land opposite to the station.

The affairs of the station are superintended by a committee of 8
gentlemen, who are elected from the boards of the four contributing
companies, and their views are carried out by their manager and
secretary, R. L. Jones, Esq., who has so well organized his large staff
of officers and men, that the arduous and responsible duties devolving
upon him are performed, not only with the greatest efficiency, but also
with a most satisfactory courtesy and convenience to the public.



CAB FARES.


Not exceeding three persons; to or from the Railway Station in
Brook-street—from or to any part of the city, within the point where the
Whitchurch and Northwich roads turn off—Abbot’s Grange and the
College—the Sluice House, including Crane-street and Paradise-row—the
Maypole in Handbridge, and the New Bridge toll-house, _One Shilling_.
The same distance; four persons, _One Shilling and Sixpence_.  Any
distance beyond the Borough, _One Shilling_ per mile.  No gratuities
allowed to be demanded by the drivers of any cars plying within the
Borough boundary, and no charge to be made for luggage not exceeding 100
lbs. in weight.



FARES TO OR FROM ANY OTHER PART OF THE CITY.


Not exceeding three persons; any distance not exceeding 1 mile, _One
Shilling_; and at the rate of _One Shilling_ per mile for every
additional mile; and _Sixpence_ for every additional half-mile or
fractional part of half a mile.  For four persons; any distance not
exceeding 1 mile, _One Shilling and Sixpence_.  For four persons; any
distance exceeding 1 mile, and not exceeding 2 miles, _Two Shillings_.
For four persons; any distance exceeding 2 miles, at the rate of _Two
Shillings_ for the first mile, and _One Shilling_ per mile for every
additional mile, and _Sixpence_ for every additional half-mile or
fractional part of half a mile.



BY TIME.


Not exceeding 1 hour, _Two Shillings and Sixpence_; and _Sixpence_ for
every 15 minutes and fractional part of 15 minutes beyond the hour.  In
all cases it shall be at the option of the owner or driver to charge by
time or distance.



THE POPULATION OF CHESTER.


According to the Census, taken March 31st, 1851, the following is a
statement of the population of each parish.

PARISHES OF                       MALES.      FEMALES.          TOTAL.
St. Oswald                             3,243         3,430       6,673
St. Peter                                430           518         948
St. Bridget                              360           501         861
St. Martin                               232           304         536
Trinity                                1,499         1,875       3,374
Little St. John’s Hospital                39            12          51
Cathedral Precincts                      145           232         377
St. John                               3,995         4,492       8,487
St. Mary                               1,620         1,688       3,308
St. Michael                              346           429         775
St. Olave                                265           253         518
Township of Great Boughton               445           514         959
(Borough portion)
Spittal Boughton                          69            89         158
Chester Castle                           507            84         591

POPULATION OF CHESTER IN

1811          17,472
1821          19,949
1831          21,373
1841          23,375
1851          27,616

DISTANCES FROM TOWN TO TOWN IN THE COUNTY OF CHESTER.


The names of the respective Towns are on the top and side, and the square
where both meet gives the distance.

                                                                                                                                           _Distance from London_.
               Altrincham                                                                                                                                180
Chester            31  Chester                                                                                                                           182
Congleton          21      33  Congleton                                                                                                                 162
Frodsham           24      10      29  Frodsham                                                                                                          192
Knutsford           7      25      14      17  Knutsford                                                                                                 176
Macclesfield       16      38       9      28      12  Macclesfield                                                                                      167
Malpas             37      15      30      24      33      35  Malpas                                                                                    169
Middlewich         16      20      13      18       9      18      24  Middlewich                                                                        167
Mottram            17      48      25      40      22      16      51      31  Mottram                                                                   187
Nantwich           28      20      18      24      21      23      12      12      43  Nantwich                                                          164
Northwich          13      18      19      12       7      20      26       6      30      17  Northwich                                                 174
Parkgate           36      10      42      16      31      45      26      30      53      30      28  Parkgate                                          190
Runcorn            24      15      36       6      16      28      30      20      41      27      14      20  Runcorn                                   188
Sandbach           19      25       9      23      11      17      22       5      41      10      11      35      25  Sandbach                          162
Stockport           9      40      20      33      14      12      44      23       8      35      22      45      33      25  Stockport                 179
Tarporley          25      10      25      15      19      26      14      10      42       9      12      20      16      15      34  Tarporley         172
Tarvin             25       6      27      10      19      32      18      14      42      14      12      16      12      19      34      4  Tarvin     178

HOTELS.


The principal Hotels in Chester are—the Royal, at the Eastgate; the
Albion, in Lower Bridge-street; the Green Dragon, in Eastgate-street; the
Feathers, in Bridge-street; the Blossoms and the Hop-pole, in
Foregate-street; the White Lion, in Northgate-street; the Liverpool Arms,
in Brook-street, near the Railway Station; the Ermine, at Flookersbrook,
near the Station; the Golden Lion, Foregate-street; the Saracen’s Head,
near the Exchange; the Kitchen, at the Eastgate; besides many others of
very good repute.




ADVERTISEMENTS.


         [Picture: Heraldic shield with two dogs and crown etc.]



WESTMINSTER SAUCE,
PATRONIZED BY THE NOBILITY AND GENTRY OF THE COUNTY AND CITY.


This Sauce, from its peculiar piquancy and zest, is pronounced by
connoisseurs to be the best and most generally useful of any yet offered
to the Public.

                            SOLE PROPRIETORS,
                             BOWERS BROTHERS,
                    WHOLESALE AND RETAIL TEA DEALERS,
                 FAMILY GROCERS AND ITALIAN WAREHOUSEMEN,
                      101, EASTGATE STREET, CHESTER.

                            ESTABLISHED 1780.

BOWERS BROTHERS respectfully request a TRIAL OF THEIR TEAS, which cannot
be excelled either in quality or price.  They have made this branch of
their business their especial study for many years, and beg gratefully to
acknowledge the kind and increasing patronage which is awarded to them in
their efforts to secure for their customers the _Best Teas on the Best
Terms_.

All orders of £2 and upwards delivered at any Railway Station free of
carriage.

          COFFEES, FRESH ROASTED ON THE MOST APPROVED PRINCIPLE.

FRENCH PLUMS, TURKEY FIGS, MUSCATEL, SULTANA, AND VALENTIA RAISINS,
PATRAS CURRANTS, and other CHOICE Dried FRUITS; CANDIED PEELS, GENUINE
PICKLES (warranted free from anything deleterious), SPICES, &c., all of
the FINEST QUALITY.

Every variety of Burning OILS, CANDLES (including Belmontine, Piano, and
other recent and elegant inventions of Price’s Patent Candle Company),
Household and Scented SOAPS, PERFUMERY, &c.

                                * * * * *

            AGENTS TO THE SUN FIRE AND LIFE INSURANCE OFFICES.

                                * * * * *



Pierce’s Important Improvements in Warming
and Ventilating,


                        MANUFACTORY AND WAREHOUSE,
                     5 JERMYN STREET, REGENT STREET.

[Picture: Pyro-pneumatic warming and ventilating stove-grate] PIERCE
solicits attention to his unrivalled

                                                PYRO-PNEUMATIC WARMING AND
                                                  VENTILATING STOVE-GRATE,

For the production of Healthful Warmth, with UNCEASING and SELF-ACTING
VENTILATION, and the open cheerful fire, for Warming Churches, Chapels,
Infant and other Schools, Public Rooms, Entrance Halls, &c., &c., with a
pure wholesome atmosphere, now fully established in public opinion as the
best economical Stove-Grate yet submitted to public notice, at

                       Prices from £7 10s. to £21.

These Grates are now adapted to meet the requirements of every
description of room or building where ventilation and comfortable warmth
are desirable, and may be seen in daily use at Lloyd’s Rooms, Royal
Exchange; at the Bank of Messrs. Alexander and Co., Lombard Street; in
the Lecture Rooms of Guy’s Hospital; at the University Hall, Gordon
Square; at Westminster Chapel, near Buckingham Palace; at the Albert Life
Office, Waterloo Place; at the Linnean Society’s Great Room, Burlington
House, and numerous other places.

          The best and cheapest Grate for all useful purposes is

                    PIERCE’S UNIVERSAL FIRE-LUMP GRATE

Which requires no fixing, being made in one piece, having strong octagon
bars and bottom, with capacious and safe hobs, complete.  Prices, 11s.
6d., 13s. 6d., 22s. 6d., and 25s.

 Also his IMPROVED COTTAGER’S GRATE, for warming Two Rooms with only one
                    fire.  Prices, 30s. and 35s.  Also

                                 PIERCE’S
                CELEBRATED FRESH AIR ECONOMICAL RADIATING
                Warming and Ventilating Fire-Lump Grates,

as supplied to the various Wards of the London Hospital; the Philological
Schools in the New Road, Marylebone; to the New Infirmary at Guildford;
to the Bank at Wells, Huntingdon County Hospital, &c., &c., where they
can be seen in use, producing salubrious warmth with continuous
ventilation, highly satisfactory to all parties, being the most
economical and useful Fresh Air Grates that are at present made.  Prices
from 30s. to 150s. according to the spaces required to be warmed.

THE ECONOMY OF FUEL is most important, as nearly one-half of the coals
uselessly burnt without perceptible benefit will now, with the Fresh Air
Fire-Lump Grates, be more than sufficient to produce an equable
temperature and perfect ventilation in any room or school to which they
may be applied.  It does not now depend upon the reflected heat, as was
the case formerly, but the fresh-warmed air continuously supplied is
fully equal to the radiant heat given off from the open fire.

PROSPECTUSES, with Illustrated Sketches of these Improvements, with
Plans, Sections, and Elevations, for the use of the Architects and
Gentlemen who may be building or altering Schools, Class Rooms,
Hospitals, &c.  PRICES of such Grates, and their proportions, may be
obtained of the Inventor and Manufacturer,

       PIERCE, at his Economical Radiating Stove-Grate Manufactory,
                     5, JERMYN STREET, REGENT STREET.

                                * * * * *



RICHMOND & CHANDLER’S
PRIZE CHAFF-CUTTING MACHINE.


       [Picture: Richmond & Chandler’s prize chaff-cutting machine]

This remarkably successful machine has now been before the public for
some years, during which time it has received the most distinguished
honours that could be awarded—the First Prizes of all the National
Societies, and the highest commendations of the Judges of all the
principal Societies in Great Britain.  In testing the comparative value
of machinery the first consideration is, the power required to work the
same: in other words, the power required to overcome the friction of the
different parts of the machinery.  RICHMOND & CHANDLER beg to observe
that the utmost attention is given to the fitting and the perfecting of
all the working parts of their machines, which they are determined shall
continue to maintain their high position and well-earned celebrity.  On
the trial of Chaff Cutters, the following report is found in the leading
journal:—

    “CHAFF-CUTTING ENGINES.—In this class of implements, Messrs. Richmond
    and Chandler have surpassed everything that has been produced before,
    inasmuch as their new machine does the same amount of work, with 45
    per cent. less power, in the same time, thereby reducing the expense
    of this important operation.  Choking in the feed—an evil to which
    the best of these machines have hitherto been more or less liable—is
    scarcely possible, from the form of toothed rollers applied.
    Altogether the getting up is well worthy the reputation of the
    inventors.”

The true and _unsolicited_ testimonial here given more than confirms the
above report of the _Times_:—

    “To Messrs. Richmond and Chandler.

    “Gentlemen,—I herewith enclose you a cheque for the amount of your
    Chaff Cutter, No. 4.  I had the opportunity of putting it to a strong
    test throughout the winter, and have much pleasure to inform you that
    it has given me perfect satisfaction.  I had been in the habit of
    using a machine for years that had obtained a high degree of
    celebrity with the Royal Agricultural Association, but I was obliged
    to get rid of it on account of the amount of labour it required, and
    the impossibility of making it feed itself.  All these objections are
    fully obviated by your machine.  A neighbour of mine has another of
    them, and he is equally pleased with his.  I remain, gentlemen,
    yours, &c.,

    “Orlingbury, Wellingborough, 8th May, 1858.

                                                            “A. A. YOUNG.”

Catalogues gratis on application to RICHMOND & CHANDLER, Salford,
Manchester, and South John Street, Liverpool.

                                * * * * *



PALATINE
HORSE INVIGORATING FOOD,


                       120 Feeds.  In Packets, 19s.

                                 PALATINE
                      CATTLE & SWINE FATTENING FOOD,
                                   AND
                                 PALATINE

                       MILK-FORMING FOOD FOR COWS.

                     120 Feeds.  In Packets, 14s. 9d.

      Delivered at any Railway Station, Carriage Free, on receipt of
                            Post-office Order.

                                * * * * *

                           G. H. BOLTON & CO.,
                          AGRICULTURAL CHEMISTS,
                               WARRINGTON.

                                * * * * *

The principle of these foods consists in the property of their elements
(by the exercise of chemical affinities) to apply the waste usually
caused by respiration and perspiration to the production of animal
activity, consolidate it into flesh, or determine it to the secretion of
milk.

                                * * * * *



Just published (June, 1858),
ELEMENTS OF ANIMAL NUTRITION
AND ORGANIC CHEMISTRY.


     Particularly as regards the vigorous condition of the Horse, the
                                Fattening
              of Cattle, and the Formation of Milk in Cows.

                             BY G. H. BOLTON,
                          AGRICULTURAL CHEMIST,
                               WARRINGTON.

  Price Sixpence, or forwarded, Post Free, to any address on receipt of
                              Seven Stamps.



THE MOST
POPULAR SCHOOL HISTORIES.


              Embellished with Plates, Maps, Engravings, &c.

                                * * * * *

WHITTAKER’S IMPROVED PINNOCK’S HISTORY OF ENGLAND.  Forty-fifth edition,
12mo., price 6s., strongly bound in roan.

WHITTAKER’S IMPROVED PINNOCK’S HISTORY OF ROME.  Thirty-second edition,
12mo., price 5s. 6d., strongly bound in roan.

WHITTAKER’S IMPROVED PINNOCK’S HISTORY of GREECE.  Twenty-eighth edition,
12mo., price 5s. 6d., strongly bound in roan.

No editions of these works are genuine except they have the name of the
publishers, Whittaker and Co., on the title-page.

                    WHITTAKER and Co., Ave Maria-line.

                                * * * * *



THE AUTHOR’S EDITIONS.
OLLENDORFF’S METHOD
OF
Learning to Read, Write, and Speak a Language
IN SIX MONTHS.


1.  ADAPTED to the GERMAN.  Written expressly for the English Student.
By Dr. H. G. OLLENDORFF.  In two parts.  Part I. eighth edition, price
12s., 8vo. cloth.  Part II., third edition, price 12s., 8vo. cloth.  The
parts sold separately.

*** Introductory book to Dr. OLLENDORFF’S method adapted to the German,
containing a new system of facilitating the study of the German
Declensions, and rules on the Gender of Substantives.  New edition, 12mo.
cloth, 3s. 6d.

2.  ADAPTED to the FRENCH.  Written expressly for the English Student.
By Dr. H. G. OLLENDORFF.  8vo. sixth edition, containing a Treatise on
the Gender of French Substantives, and an additional Treatise on the
French Verbs.  Price 12s. cloth.

3.  ADAPTED to the ITALIAN.  Written expressly for the English Student.
By Dr. H. G. OLLENDORFF.  8vo., third edition, price 12s. cloth.

4.  ADAPTED to the SPANISH.  In the press.

KEYS to the ITALIAN, FRENCH, and GERMAN SYSTEMS, prepared by the author.
Price 7s. each, cloth lettered.

It is necessary for those who desire to avail themselves of the present
method to notice, that these are the only English editions sanctioned by
Dr. OLLENDORFF, and he deems any other totally inadequate for the purpose
of English instruction, and for the elucidation of the method so strongly
recommended by Captain Basil Hall, and other eminent writers.  They
should be ordered with the publisher’s name, and, to prevent errors,
every copy has its number and the author’s signature.

The above works are copyright.

    London: WHITTAKER and Co., and DULAU and Co., and to be had of any
                               Bookseller.

                                * * * * *



MR. A. TAIT,
TAILOR, DRAPER, AND HATTER,
BRIDGE STREET ROW,
CHESTER.


                                * * * * *



WILLIAM FITCH,
(Successor to H. Bailey,)


                    HAIR CUTTER, WIG MAKER, PERFUMER,
                          AND FANCY HAIR WORKER,
                     11, BRIDGE STREET ROW, CHESTER.

                                * * * * *

            Shampooing on the Oxford and Cambridge Principle.

                                * * * * *



JOHN HOWARD,
LADIES’ AND GENTLEMEN’S BOOT AND SHOE MAKER,
11, BRIDGE STREET ROW, CHESTER.


                  Ladies’ Boots and Shoes made to Order,

             Gentlemen’s Shooting, Fishing, and Dress Boots.

                PARIS, LONDON AND DUBLIN BOOTS AND SHOES.

                                * * * * *



MESSES. EWEN AND REVIS,
AUCTIONEERS, APPRAISERS,
LAND SURVEYORS, CIVIL ENGINEERS,
House, Estate, and General Commission Agents,
CHESTER.


            OFFICES:—THE CITY AUCTION MAST, BRIDGE STREET ROW.

                                * * * * *

             _N.B.—A General Rent Audit held every Quarter_.

                                * * * * *



WILLIAMS & SON,
TOBACCO AND SNUFF MANUFACTURERS,


                                 CHESTER.

                                * * * * *



FAMILY GROCERY ESTABLISHMENT,


                        [Picture: Heraldic shield]

                                   AND
                            ITALIAN WAREHOUSE,
                      100, EASTGATE STREET, CHESTER.

                                * * * * *

                            DUTTON AND MILLER

Respectfully inform their numerous patrons that their Stock of GROCERY
and ITALIAN ARTICLES is now one of the most complete in the kingdom,
comprising every article of known merit and recent introduction.  As
successors to one of the oldest established Grocery Connexions in
Chester, the best endeavours have been made to sustain the reputation
enjoyed by their predecessors, and they have the gratification of stating
that their Establishment will be found, by those who have not yet
honoured it with their patronage, unequalled for the advantageous terms
on which FAMILY ORDERS are supplied.

FAMILIES residing in the adjacent counties and principality who may be
desirous of giving their articles a trial are respectfully recommended to
purchase their

               One Guinea Case of Sample Teas and Coffees,

which contains Four Pounds of various priced Teas, and the same quantity
of the finest Jamaica and Plantation Coffees.  Any other article required
for trial they will have pleasure in substituting.  The cases are
delivered, CARRIAGE FREE, at any first-class Station within fifty miles
of Chester.

                   Free Delivery of Orders by Railway.

The Railway facilities of Chester have become so well known that it would
be unnecessary to mention more than that the VAN-PARCELS TRAINS, leaving
Chester daily, possess superior advantages for the speedy transmission of
Goods.  Orders to the value of TWO POUNDS AND UPWARDS, are forwarded by
these trains, CARRIAGE PAID, to any first-class Station on either Line of
Railway.

A full and detailed List of Grocery is annually published in the month of
December, compiled with the greatest care, and is of considerable service
to Housekeepers.  Their SPECIAL LIST for 1858, with the latest
introductions, will be forwarded, together with a detailed list, POST
FREE, on application.

        Agents for Huntley & Palmer’s Celebrated Reading Biscuits.

                                * * * * *



RELIANCE
MUTUAL LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY,
71, KING WILLIAM STREET, LONDON.


              THE ENTIRE PROFITS DIVIDED AMONG THE ASSURED.

                                DIRECTORS.

GEORGE ASHLIN, Esq.                 HENRY T. PRINSEP, Esq.
GEORGE F. HARRIS, Esq.              CHARLES H. SMITH, Esq.
JOHN JAMES, Esq.                    JAMES TRAILL, Esq.
JOHN LEDGER, Esq.                   GEORGE WHITMORE, Esq.,
WILLIAM PHELPS, Esq.

     _Bankers_—Messrs. Williams, Deacon, Labouchere, Thornton and Co.

                  ADVANTAGES PRESENTED BY THIS SOCIETY.

Life Assurances may be effected upon _Increasing_, _Decreasing_, _Equal_,
or _Half-Premium_ Scales; also by _Single Payments_, and Payments for
_limited periods_.  Tables have been specially constructed for the Army,
Navy, East India Company, and Merchant Services; also for persons
voyaging to, or residing in any part of the world.—No charge for Policy
Stamps.

Endowments for Widows and Children, Pensions for retired Officers and
Civilians, Immediate or Deferred Annuities, and every other description
of Life Contingency, upon liberal and equitable terms.

The Entire Profits are divided periodically among the Assured, and may,
at their option, be applied in reduction of Premiums, or in augmentation
of the Sums for which the Policies were granted.

Applications for Agency to be addressed to the Secretary.

                                E. OSBORNE SMITH, _Actuary and Secretary_.

                                * * * * *



WILLIAM PARKINSON,
Plumber, Glazier, and Gas Fitter,
NORTHGATE,
CHESTER.


                                * * * * *

            Baths, Pumps, and Water Closets Fixed on the most
                           approved principles.

                                * * * * *



W. WILLIAMS,
BASKET AND HAMPER MANUFACTURER,


                          AND DEALER IN BRUSHES,
                   104, BRIDGE STREET (NEAR THE CROSS),

                                 CHESTER.

                                * * * * *

                         REPAIRS NEATLY EXECUTED.

                                * * * * *



ROYAL HOTEL, CHESTER


                      [Picture: Royal coat of arms]

VISITORS AND TOURISTS will find the above HOTEL in every way adapted to
their comfort and requirements, and after a Survey of Chester and its
vicinity, the most convenient _en route_ to Scotland, Ireland, and Wales.

                                                  D. M‘GREGOR, Proprietor.

                                * * * * *

                         To Tourists and others.



T. B. FOULKES,


                             OLD ESTABLISHED

                      GLOVE MANUFACTURER AND HOSIER,

                             CROSS, CHESTER,

Has always in stock a Large Assortment of GLOVES AND GAUNTLETS, of his
own and other approved makes.

His PATENT GAUNTLETS continue to give great satisfaction; their accuracy
in fitting being very much superior to all others.

                                * * * * *



J. THOMPSON,
PRINTSELLER, ETC.,
BRIDGE STREET ROW,
CHESTER,


   Repository for the Sale of VIEWS IN WALES, of the ANCIENT BUILDINGS
            IN CHESTER, and GUIDE BOOKS for Chester and Wales.

                                * * * * *

            ENGRAVER, LITHOGRAPHER, AND COPPER-PLATE PRINTER.

                                * * * * *

      _Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s Address Cards Engraved and Printed_.

                                * * * * *



THE ROYAL FARMERS’
AGRICULTURAL AND COMMERCIAL
INSURANCE COMPANY,


                    3, NORFOLK STREET, STRAND, LONDON.

                                DIRECTORS.

   Chairman—STEPHEN C. DENISON, Esq., Deputy Judge Advocate, 35, Great
                   George Street, Westminster, London.

   Deputy Chairman—B. P. SHEARER, Esq., Swanmore House, Bishop Waltham,
                                  Hants.

SAMUEL BOYDELL, Esq., 41, Queen     WILLIAM WILBERFORCE PEARSON,
Square, Bloomsbury, London.         Esq., 27, Wimpole Street, London.

NEWSON GARRETT, Esq., Alde House,   THOMAS ROLLS, Esq., Chipping
Aldeburgh, Suffolk.                 Norton, Oxfordshire.

EDWARD JAMES HAWKER, Esq., 37,      THOMAS SMITH, Esq., 36, Hart
Cadogan Place, Sloane Street,       Street, Bloomsbury, London.
Chelsea.
                                    GEORGE PARKER TUXFORD, Esq., 246,
SAMUEL JONAS, Esq., Ickleton,       Strand, London.
Cambridgeshire.
                                    THOMAS WATERS, Esq., Winchester,
Rev. HENRY E. KNATCHBULL, Elmham    Hants.
Vicarage, Thetford, Norfolk.

FIRE INSURANCES on every description of Property, on terms as moderate as
any other well-established Office.

No charge for new Fire Policies, if for £300 or upwards, or if removed
from other Offices to favour this Company.

HAIL INSURANCE—The Bonus allowed in the year 1856 was upwards of 66 per
cent. on Insurances of Five Years’ duration.

LOSSES promptly and liberally settled.

LIFE POLICIES payable to the Registered Holders, by which much
inconvenience and expense is prevented.

BONUS GUARANTEED—Insurers of the Participating class will be entitled to
four-fifths of the profits; and if no profit shall have been made, the
Company will, nevertheless, make such additions quinquennially as will be
equivalent to the excess of premium paid over that which would have been
required for insurances of the non-participating class.

BONUS—The next division of profits, four-fifths of which will be allotted
to Policies of the participating class, will be on the five years ending
on the 3lst of December of the present year.  The amounts will be made
known to the Policy-holders immediately after the Annual General Meeting
in May following.

No charge for Life Policy Stamps.

                                * * * * *

Additional Agents wanted.  Application to be made to

                                      JOHN REDDISH, SECRETARY AND ACTUARY.

                                * * * * *

                          AGENCIES IN CHESHIRE.

Chester               Mr. Thomas W. Jones, Auctioneer, 27 Queen
                      Street.
Altrincham            Mr. G. Wilde, Postmaster.
Birkenhead            Mr. Thos. Jas. Hutchinson, Architect, 6, Market
                      Cross Chambers, Market Street, and Mr. Euclid
                      Shaw, Post-office.
Congleton             Mr. J. Dawn, Buxton.
Macclesfield          Mr. George Barton.
Northwich             Mr. Henry Warburton, Davenham.
Runcorn               James Cawley, Esq., Heath House.
Sandbach              J. Remer, Esq., Solicitor.
Stockport             Mr. J. Sergent, Coal Merchant, Warren Street.
Tarporley             Mr. R. T. Beckett, Land Agent, Oulton Farm.
Talk-’o-’th-Hill      Mr. Joseph Smallwood.
Witton                Mr. Thomas Dobell, Seedsman.

                                * * * * *



The Blossoms Family and Commercial Hotel,
CHESTER.


                        HENRY CUTTER, PROPRIETOR.

To FAMILIES, COMMERCIAL GENTLEMEN, and PARTIES on PLEASURE, the above
Hotel offers peculiar advantages, being situated in the centre of the
City, adjoining the Post Office, near to the Banks, within two minutes’
walk of the Ancient City Wall, and Cathedral, and the nearest Hotel to
the Railway Station.  The above Hotel is one of the OLDEST ESTABLISHMENTS
IN THE CITY, and is conducted on principles combining COMFORT WITH THE
STRICTEST ECONOMY.

                  A FIXED MODERATE CHARGE FOR SERVANTS.

            Omnibuses to and from the Railway for every Train.

☞ Attached to the above Hotel, and TO BE LET, IS A LARGE AND SPACIOUS
ROOM, 25 yards long, well lighted with gas, and to which there is an
excellent approach.

Note from the Visitors’ Book at the Blossoms Hotel, received from the
Lady of Lord Campbell, Lord Chief Justice of England.—“Lady Stratheden
and family passed three nights at the Blossoms Inn, and were well
satisfied with the accommodation and attention of Mr. and Mrs. Cutter.”

                                * * * * *



OLD BOOK REPOSITORY.


                          GENTLEMEN IN SEARCH OF
                         RARE AND CURIOUS BOOKS,
          Are respectfully invited to inspect the Collection at

                       G. H. CROWTHER’S REPOSITORY,

                           ST. WERBERGH STREET,

 Where, if they do not find what they want, they may meet with what they
                         did not expect to find.

   Libraries of any extent, and smaller parcels of Books purchased for
                            immediate payment.

                                * * * * *



IMPORTANT TO TOURISTS.


                       Sold by all Stationers, &c.,
                       SMITH’S PATENT POCKET BOOK,
                         With Expanding Pockets.

                      SMITH’S MANIFOLD LETTER BOOK,
  Not requiring Ink.  The Writing is Jet Black, and perfectly indelible.
                           Bound Roan and Lock.

                    SMITH’S METALLIC MEMORANDUM BOOKS,
                                   AND
                         PORTABLE WRITING CASES,
                With everything requisite for the Tourist.

                            T. J. & J. SMITH,
                   PATENTEES AND MANUFACTURERS, LONDON.

                                * * * * *



THE GREAT BOTANIC MEDICINE.


                     DR. TORRENS’ PURE HERBAL PILLS.

                                * * * * *

No language can convey an adequate idea of the immediate and almost
miraculous change produced by making use of these Pills in the diseased,
debilitated, and shattered nervous system.  To print all the letters of
thanks received from different individuals, describing the great benefit
received by making use of this medicine, would fill a book larger than
the Bible!  The relaxed and debilitated body and nerves are at once
rebraced, restored, enlivened, and built up.  The mental and physical
symptoms of all disease vanish together under its influence—the stooping
trembling victim of depression or debility becomes a new man; he stands
erect; he moves with a firm step; his mind, which was previously sunk in
gloom, becomes bright, buoyant, active, and he goes forth refreshed,
regenerated, and conscious of new vigour, to his accustomed occupation.
And the effect is not temporary; on the contrary, the relief is
permanent; for the cordial properties of the medicine reach the
constitution itself, and restores it to its first condition.  Well may
this preparation be called the Medical Wonder of the nineteenth century.
It is, indeed, that miracle of medicine that stimulates without producing
a corresponding depression.  In all diseases of the stomach and digestive
organs it never fails, and by setting the stomach to rights, all the
other functions of the body are sure to be set to rights also.  In cases
of headache, vertigo, pain in the face and nerves, and all the varied
train of nervous affections, these pills perform a cure in an astonishing
short period of time.  They also remove depression, excitement,
restlessness, want of sleep, a dislike to society, incapacity for
business, loss of memory, confusion, giddiness, blood in the head,
melancholy, mental debility, hysteria, indecision, wretchedness, &c.
They increase and restore the appetite, strengthen the emaciated, renew
the health of those who have destroyed it, cause a continued
cheerfulness, and prolong life to the latest possible period.

The following Testimonial of the great value of TORRENS’ HERBAL PILLS is
taken out of thousands:—

                              “To the Proprietor of Torrens’ Herbal Pills.
                                             53, Church-street, Blackburn.

    “Sir,—I have just received the twelve dozen of Dr. Torrens’ Herbal
    Pills, which I am happy to observe are going off in a very
    satisfactory manner.  Since I last wrote you, I have had frequent
    testimonials from various persons, old and young, of their beneficial
    effects—several of whom have stated that they consider the Herbal
    Pills not only an excellent medicine for correcting vicious humours
    in the system, but also efficacious in purifying the blood, relieving
    the liver, cleansing the intestines, and producing vigorous reaction
    in the whole arterial system.

                          “Yours faithfully, CHARLES TIPLADY, Bookseller.”

*** Parties desirous of selling Torrens’ Herbal Pills can be supplied, at
wholesale prices, by Messrs. Parry and Son, Booksellers, Chester; or from
any of the Wholesale Houses.  Sold also by Mrs. Dutton, City Walls.

Should the reader find any difficulty in procuring a box of Dr. Torrens’
Pills, he can send 15 postage stamps to Richard Brook, Printer,
Buxton-road, Huddersfield, when a box will be returned by post to any
part of the Kingdom.

                                * * * * *



JOHN SMITH & SON,


                  WOOLLEN DRAPERS, TAILORS, AND HATTERS,

                           EASTGATE STREET ROW,

                                 CHESTER.

                                * * * * *

         _Just Published_.  _Price Two Guineas_, _neatly Bound_,



ANTIQUITIES OF CHESHIRE,
IN PHOTOGRAPH,


                     WITH SHORT DESCRIPTIVE NOTES BY
                          WILLIAM BRYANS, M.A.,
                        VICAR OF TARVIN, CHESHIRE;

                           TO WHICH ARE ADDED,
                  VIEWS OF CONWAY AND CARNARVON CASTLES,

                                  AND OF
                HAUGHMOND AND BUILDWAS ABBEYS, SHROPSHIRE.

This Series of Photographic Pictures will contain Views of the most
interesting remains of Antiquity in the City and County of Chester; among
which will be found specimens of Ancient Domestic Architecture, Churches,
Ruins, and Crosses.

                 Published by HUGH ROBERTS, Eastgate Row.

                                * * * * *



TOWN MADE SILK, ALPACA, AND GINGHAM
UMBRELLAS AND PARASOLS!!


                                    AT
                        GEORGE WILLIAMS AND CO.’S,
                              GLASGOW HOUSE,
                      18, EASTGATE STREET, CHESTER.

  _Gentlemen’s Shirts_, _Silk Ties_, _Collars_, _Wool Vests_, _Gloves_,
                             _Hosiery_, _&c._

                                * * * * *



G. KENRICK,


                              PATENT ELASTIC
               Spring Truss and Deformity Instrument Maker,
                      31, EASTGATE STREET, CHESTER.

                                * * * * *

                       ARTIFICIAL ARMS, LEGS, ETC.

                                * * * * *

          _Elastic Stockings_, _Knee-Caps_, _Ancle-Socks_, _&c._

                                * * * * *



ESTABLISHED 1748.


                             OLD ESTABLISHED
              Cheshire Cheese & Family Provision Warehouse,
                       139, BRIDGE STREET, CHESTER.

                                * * * * *

                          ROBERT GRIFFITH PARRY

BEGS to return his grateful thanks for the very kind manner in which he
has been patronized since he succeeded to the business of his late
Grandmother, Mary Griffith (so successfully carried on by her for upwards
of 50 years); and he assures his friends that he will endeavour to merit
a continuance of their favours, by keeping a constant supply of the best
articles at the lowest possible prices.

R. G. P. has always on hand a large stock of the following articles:—

CHEESE.                             HAMS.

Cheshire,                           Home Cured,
Double Gloucester,                  Cumberland,
Single Gloucester,                  Yorkshire / Wiltshire (Smoked).
North Wiltshire,
Truckles,                           BACON.
Stilton,
Cheddar,                            Wiltshire, Smoked,
Leigh / Derbyshire / Dunlop (for    Breakfast Bacon,
toasting).                          Home Cured,
                                    Cumberland.

  BLADDERED LARD.  Genuine WELSH BUTTER, in pots, from fifteen to forty
        pounds each, for Families.  FRESH LUMP BUTTER every week.

             FAMILIES SUPPLIED ON THE MOST REASONABLE TERMS.

                                * * * * *



HARP AND PIANOFORTE WAREHOUSES.
ABBEY STREET AND THE NORTHGATE.


                                * * * * *

                              BOUCHER & CO.,

Have now a well selected Stock of PIANOFORTES, &c., new and second-hand,
for SALE or HIRE, at all prices; including the newly-introduced STUDIO
Pianofortes, by eminent makers, at 16 and 18 Guineas, of superior
excellence and durability.

Also the ‘FOREIGN MODEL,’ an instrument of the Cottage size, combining
every excellence of manufacture with the tone and touch of a small Grand
Pianoforte.

Warranty unlimited, with option of Exchange at any time on favourable
terms.

Harps, Harmoniums, Concertinas, &c., by the best makers.

Tuning and Repairing of the most extensive descriptions in town and
country.  Abbey Street, May, 1858.

                                * * * * *



ESTABLISHED 1780.
BOWERS BROTHERS,
DISPENSING CHEMISTS,


                      101, EASTGATE STREET, CHESTER.

                                * * * * *

       PRESCRIPTIONS AND FAMILY RECEIPTS PREPARED WITH THE GREATEST
                            CARE AND ACCURACY.

Bowers’s Cestrian Bouquet.          Bowers’s Glycerine Cold Cream.
,, Essence of Spring Flowers.       ,, Camphor Balls.
,, Lavender Water.                  ,, Pearl Dentrifice.

        And a Variety of other Elegant Requisites for the Toilet.

          SCHWEPPE’S SODA WATER AND LEMONADE ON WHOLESALE TERMS.

                                * * * * *



TO ADVERTISERS.


                          THE CHESHIRE OBSERVER,
                          AND GENERAL ADVERTISER

                                   FOR

                        CHESHIRE AND NORTH WALES,

                             IS NOW THE MOST
                  WIDELY CIRCULATED PAPER IN THE COUNTY,

    And is especially devoted to the interests of Chester, Birkenhead,
                                Nantwich,
        Northwich, Crewe, Sandbach, Winsford, Congleton, Runcorn,
             Knutsford, Middlewich, Wrexham, Holywell, Mold,
                     Whitchurch, Ruthin, Denbigh, &c.

     _And the surrounding neighbourhoods_, _where it has an extensive
                              circulation_.

                                * * * * *

              THIS PAPER IS PUBLISHED EVERY FRIDAY EVENING,

                           AND CONTAINS ALL THE
           Local, Provincial, Parliamentary, and Foreign News,

                            TOGETHER WITH THE
                       LATEST STATE OF THE MARKETS

                      Up to the hour of Publication;

                ADVOCATES FREE TRADE AND THE INTERESTS OF
                   AGRICULTURE AND COMMERCE CONJOINTLY;

                              AND IS BOTH A
                     POLITICAL AND LITERARY JOURNAL.
                 ON RELIGIOUS TOPICS IT IS NOT SECTARIAN.

                                * * * * *

 It may be had of all Booksellers and Newsvenders, or of the Publishers,

                            H. SMITH AND CO.,
                       BOOKSELLERS AND STATIONERS,
                     27, BRIDGE STREET ROW, CHESTER.

                                * * * * *

     Price, Stamped, 3s. 3d. per Quarter; Unstamped Copies, 2d. each.

                        CIRCULATION 2,500 WEEKLY.

                                * * * * *



CHESTER HOMŒOPATHIC PHARMACY,
CAXTON BUILDINGS, PEPPER STREET.


                                * * * * *

                              EDWARD THOMAS

Prepares the HOMŒOPATHIC REMEDIES in the forms of Globules, Pilules,
Tincture, and Trituration.  His experience and care in preparing the
Medicines has procured for him the confidence of the profession and the
public in various parts of the Kingdom.

                      STANDARD WORKS ON HOMŒOPATHY.

                                * * * * *

                        Medicine Chests and Cases,

Of various sizes and forms, adapted to Professional and Domestic
Treatises on Homœopathy.

                                * * * * *

                          DR. THOMAS ON ARNICA,

              CALENDULA, CANTHARIDES, LEDUM, RUTA, AND RHUS,
                    as EXTERNAL REMEDIES in Accidents.
                          Price 1s., post free.

                                * * * * *

                 THOMAS AND GUERNSEY’S DOMESTIC PRACTICE,
                          Price 5s., post free.

                                * * * * *

                        THOMAS’S HOMŒOPATHIC COCOA

Is prepared especially for Invalids and persons of weak digestion; and is
confidently recommended as an agreeable and wholesome beverage.

                                * * * * *

Illustrated Priced Catalogues of Medicines, Chests, Books, &c., sent free
                             on application.

                                * * * * *

                 SINGLE TUBES OF THE MEDICINES SUPPLIED.

                                * * * * *

                        CHESTS OR CASES REFITTED.

                                * * * * *

            [Picture: Crown with Ich Dien written underneath]



GEORGE HOTEL,
BANGOR FERRY,
NORTH WALES.


IN returning her grateful thanks for the patronage and support which she
has received during the last fifteen years,

                               MISS ROBERTS

begs to inform her friends and the public, that during the winter season
she has added to the comforts and accommodation at “THE GEORGE,” on a
scale calculated to meet its present requirements.

Among the buildings now added to “THE GEORGE,” is a NEW COFFEE ROOM, on a
magnificent scale; adjoining which, and fitted up in a style appropriate
for _evening reception_, is an OCTAGONAL DRAWING-ROOM of corresponding
proportions.  Above is a new range of SLEEPING APARTMENTS, which enables
Miss Roberts to make up _forty additional beds_.

The STABLES have been much enlarged and improved; the CARRIAGE and
POSTING departments having, at the same time, undergone thorough
revision.

Additional HOT and COLD BATHS have been built, and are always ready.

SEA-BATHING may be enjoyed at the foot of the grounds.

OMNIBUSES from “THE GEORGE” meet every train at Bangor Station.

LIVERPOOL STEAMERS ply to and from Bangor Ferry daily.

PLEASURE and SAILING BOATS are in constant attendance, and the Sea
Fishing in the Straits opposite the house seldom fails to afford sport.

“THE GEORGE” is lighted by gas manufactured for its sole use, and free
from any impurity.

TWO TABLES D’HÔTE are served daily; one at 3, and the other at 6, P.M.

The House is, as usual, supplied with Wines of the first class.

The growing necessity which Miss Roberts has of late experienced for more
ample accommodation, to meet the requirements of the increased numbers
who honour her house with their patronage, has induced her, at a very
large outlay, to perfect her present arrangements; and she ventures to
express a hope that the spacious and well-appointed Apartments which have
formed part of her plan, will now be found sufficient for a demand which
for some time past it has been difficult fully to provide for.

_George Hotel_, _Bangor Ferry_, _June_, 1858.

                                * * * * *



Atlas Fire and Life Assurance Office,
92, CHEAPSIDE, LONDON.


                            ESTABLISHED 1808,
     And Empowered by Act of Parliament of the 54th Geo. III. c. 79.

                                DIRECTORS.

Chairman.—J. OLIVER HANSON, Esq.    Dep. Chairman.—WM. GEO. PRESCOTT,
Sir WILLIAM BAYNES, Bart.           Esq.
ARTHUR EDWARD CAMPBELL, Esq.        JOHN GEORGE MACLEAN, Esq.
THOMAS CHAPMAN, Esq., F.R.S.        SAMUEL EUSTACE MAGAN, Esq.
BENJAMIN BUCK GREENE, Esq.          CAPT. ALEX L. MONTGOMERY, R.N.
JOSEPH GROTE, Esq.                  JOSEPH PULLEY, Esq.
                                    ARTHUR AUGUSTUS RASCH, Esq.

Auditors.—JOHN OLIVER HANSON, Jun. Esq., and PHILIP AINSLIE WALKER, Esq.

Actuary.—CHARLES ANSELL, Esq. F.R.S.  Solicitor.—THOMAS BROWNING, Esq.

                                * * * * *

                             LIFE DEPARTMENT.

The Accumulated Premiums are over £1,600,000.  And the Annual Income
exceeds £184,000.

Bonuses have been declared on Policies to an amount greater than the sum
originally assured.

Premiums have been extinguished, where the parties assured have applied
the bonus in reduction to the Annual Premium.

At the last valuation up to Christmas, 1854, there existed a Surplus of
£268,691, which had accrued during the five years ending at that
period—the whole of which Surplus belonging to the policy holders.

The next valuation will be made up to Christmas, 1859.  _Policies on the
Participating Scale_, in England or Ireland _respectively_, which may be
effected before that date, will, if the parties be then alive,
participate in the surplus in proportion to the time they may have been
in force.

The sum of £3,130,975 has been paid during the existence of the Office
for claims under Life Policies, of which amount a very considerable part
was for Bonuses.

Persons assuring in Great Britain have the option of

  Participating Rates of Premium, or of
  Non-Participating Rates.

The Directors beg to announce that the rates of Premium have been
recently revised and re-adjusted in accordance with a long experience,
and that

The New Scale will be found very advantageous to persons desiring to
commence assuring early in life.

The Non-participating Scale is particularly adapted to parties wishing to
assure a fixed sum only, at a fixed rate of Premium, and on low terms.

Premiums may be paid _Annually_, _Half-yearly_, or by a _limited number
of Annual Payments_.  The last-named mode of Assurance originated with
this Office in 1816.

                             FIRE DEPARTMENT.

Renewals should be paid within fifteen days after the respective
Quarter-days when they become due.

The Company undertakes the assurance of Property in the Manufacturing,
Agricultural and other districts, on favourable terms.  Risks of
extraordinary hazard on special agreement, upon survey.

An Allowance for the Loss of Rent of Buildings rendered untenantable by
Fire is one of the advantages offered by the Company.

Tables of Rates, forms of proposal, and any information needful to effect
Life or Fire Assurances, may be obtained on application to the Office,
No. 92, Cheapside, London, or to any of the Company’s Agents.

London, May, 1858.

                                              HENRY DESBOROUGH, Secretary.

                           AGENTS FOR CHESTER:
               MR. HUGH ROBERTS, AND MR. THOMAS CATHERALL.

                                * * * * *



WOOD’S
SUFFOLK IRON WORKS, STOWMARKET,


                           WILL EXHIBIT AT THE
                       ROYAL AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY’S

                             CHESTER MEETING,

            A SELECTION OF A FIRST CLASS CHARACTER, COMPRISING

                        STOCK FEEDING IMPLEMENTS,
                             BARN MACHINERY,
                        FIELD AND ROAD IMPLEMENTS,

                          WITH OTHER MACHINERY,

                       AMONGST WHICH WILL BE FOUND

                    Steam Engines, Thrashing Machines,
                Grinding Mills, Crushing & Ribbling Mills,

                    HARWOOD’S PATENT REAPING MACHINE,
                   PHILLIPS’ IMPROVED NEW ROOT MINCERS,
                      PALMER’S PATENT CHAFF CUTTERS,

              PHILLIPS’ PATENT FERTILIZING LEVER HARROW AND
                             WEED EXTIRPATOR,

                              COMBINED WITH

                       HOWARD’S PATENT HORSE RAKES,

                                   THE
              SALISBURY FIRST PRIZE ONE-HORSE SUFFOLK CARTS,

                   WHEELS FOR WAGGONS, WAINS, &c., &c.,

                   HORSE POWERS FOR DRIVING MACHINERY,

                              &c., &c., &c.

                                * * * * *

  Illustrated Handbooks, with Illustrations and Prices of which will be
                                   sent
                       post free, on application to

                  WOOD’S SUFFOLK IRON WORKS, STOWMARKET.

                                * * * * *



The Royal Agricultural Society’s Meeting at Chester,
1858.


                   FIRST CLASS AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY.

                                * * * * *

                           R. GARRETT AND SONS,
                   LEISTON WORKS, SAXMUNDHAM, SUFFOLK,

                                  AND AT
                      40, MARK LANE CHAMBERS, E.C.,

Respectfully solicit the continued patronage and support of the numerous
body of Agriculturists, Shippers, Merchants, and others, whom they have
had the honour of supplying with Agricultural Machines and Implements for
the last thirty years.  With their extensively increased facilities for
manufacturing, R. G. and Sons are now enabled to supply with dispatch,
and at the lowest cost consistent with sound workmanship and thorough
efficiency, combined with practical utility—Fixed and Portable Steam
Engines, for Agricultural Purposes, Contractors’ work, &c., &c.; Combined
Thrashing and Dressing Machines, for steam, water, and horse power;
Drills of every description; Patent Manure Distributors, and Patent Horse
Hoes; Chaff and Straw Cutters, for steam, horse, and hand power;
Corn-Dressing and Winnowing Machines; Improved Reaping Machines; Hay
Machines and Drag Rakes; Sawing Machinery, from four to twenty
horse-power; Stone Grinding Mills and Flour-Dressing Machines; Tile,
Pipe, and Brick Machines; Barn and Field Implements of the most approved
construction, &c., &c., &c., full particulars of which will be found in

                  R. G. and Sons’ Illustrated Catalogue.

For the above Machines R. GARRETT and SONS have received 161 _Money
Prizes_, 31 _Gold and Silver Medals_, besides the _Great Council Medals
and Gold Medals of Honour of the Exhibition of all Nations_, _held in
Hyde Park in_ 1851, _in Ireland in_ 1853, _in Paris in_ 1855, _and in
Vienna in_ 1857.

Complete sets of the most improved Farm Machinery are erected by GARRETT
and SONS, adapted to the nature and size of the occupations, and with the
arrangements best suited to the buildings.  Plans and estimates will be
furnished, with reference, on application; also Catalogues, in either
English, French, or German, sent postage free, on application as above.

                       SALISBURY SHOW, JULY, 1857.

The competition by R. G. and SONS, at this meeting, was confined to the
class of Horse Hoes and Drills, and, after a most patient and searching
trial, the FIRST PRIZE in Horse Hoes was again awarded to R. G. and SONS’
well-known Implement, which has now been before the Public upwards of
fourteen years, taking the FIRST PRIZE AT EVERY MEETING at which it has
competed, distancing all competitors, and has earned for itself a
reputation such as no other implement ever has done.  This result is the
more important when it is borne in mind that no _further competition_
will take place in _Horse Hoes until the year_ 1860.  No less than 64
Horse Hoes were exhibited at Salisbury, all of which, by the awards, are
pronounced more or less inferior to

                       R. G. & SONS’ PRIZE MACHINE.

The following statement shows the result of the competition—

The Patent Horse Hoe                      FIRST PRIZE.
(Making THIRTY-EIGHT FIRST PRIZES and TEN MEDALS awarded for
this excellent Implement.)
The Small Occupation Corn Drill           FIRST PRIZE.
The Liquid Manure Distributor             FIRST PRIZE.
The Corn, Seed, and Manure Drill          SECOND PRIZE.
The Liquid, Seed, and Manure Drop Drill   FIRST PRIZE.
The Corn and Seed Drill                   HIGHLY COMMENDED.
The Seed and Manure Ridge Drill           SECOND PRIZE.

And at the Waterford Meeting, August, 1857, R. G. and SONS received for
their

               IMPROVED EIGHT-HORSE POWER PORTABLE ENGINE,
             AND FINISHING, THRASHING, AND DRESSING MACHINE,

                          AND OTHER IMPLEMENTS,
                THE PRIZE OF £30 FOR THE BEST COLLECTION,
             AND A SPECIAL MEDAL FOR THE ENGINE AND MACHINE.

                                * * * * *

N.B.—Early Orders are respectfully solicited, and will ensure prompt
attention.  _Leiston Works_, _June_, 1858.

                                * * * * *



VISITORS
BEFORE YOU LEAVE CHESTER


                     CALL AT No. 117, BRIDGE STREET,

                AND SEE THAT ANCIENT RELIC OF THE ROMANS,

                         THE BATH AND HYPOCAUST,

                 PRONOUNCED BY ALL ANTIQUARIANS TO BE THE

                      GREATEST CURIOSITY IN CHESTER.

    “Near to the Feathers Hotel, in Bridge Street, are premises now
    occupied as a CHINA SHOP, in which are the remains of the Roman
    Hypocaust and Sweating Bath, the use of which appears to have been
    very general among the Romans, and regarded by them as one of their
    chief luxuries.  From the details which have been handed down to us
    by ancient historians, respecting these curious erections, we learn
    that they were not only constructed so as to secure the comfort and
    convenience of the bathers to the fullest extent, but were often
    built in the most magnificent style of architecture.  The one in
    Bridge Street, which circumstances have happily spared, is in a
    tolerably perfect state.”

                                * * * * *



FIRST CLASS AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY.
R. HORNSBY AND SONS,
SPITTLEGATE IRONWORKS, GRANTHAM, LINCOLNSHIRE,


Invite the attention of Agricultural Shippers, Merchants, and Others, to
their improved Agricultural Machinery, comprising—Patent Portable Steam
Engines, Patent Combined Machines for Threshing and perfectly Dressing
Corn for Market at one operation.  Improved Circular Saw Benches,
Portable Corn Grinding Mills, Corn, Seed, and Manure Drills of all Kinds,
Patent Corn Dressing Machines and Blowers, Chaff Cutters, Cake Breakers,
Ploughs, &c. &c. &c., the pre-eminent excellence of which is fully
attested by the numerous prizes which have been awarded to them in the
United Kingdom, on the Continent of Europe, and in the Colonies,
numbering in all about 200 money prizes of £1,400 value, and twenty-one
Gold, Silver, and Bronze Medals, including the Great Council Medal of the
Exhibition of the Industry of all Nations, London, 1851; the Grand Medal
of Honour at the Universal Exposition, Paris, 1855; three Gold Medals of
the Imperial Royal Agricultural Society of Austria, at Vienna, 1857; the
Gold Medal of the Agricultural Society of Gers, at Condom, 1857; and the
first prize of the Agricultural Society of Geelong, Australia.

Illustrated Catalogues, with Prices of Engines and Thrashing Machines,
greatly reduced for the present year, sent free, by post, on application
to R. HORNSBY AND SONS, Spittlegate Iron Works, Grantham, Lincolnshire.

FOR EXPORTATION—Engines, Machinery, and Implements specially adapted, may
be had through all British Merchants and Shipping Agents.

                                * * * * *



M. WILLIAMS,
SILK, WOOLLEN, & COTTON DYER,
CLEANER, GLAZER, AND HOT PRESSER,
ST. WERBURGH STREET, CHESTER.


 Gentlemen’s Wearing Apparel Renovated.  Blankets and Carpets scoured on
                                   the
            shortest notice, and on the most reasonable terms.

                                * * * * *



EDWARD PARIS,
BAZAAR AND FANCY REPOSITORY,
73, EASTGATE ROW, CHESTER.


Visitors to Chester are respectfully invited to inspect the large and
well assorted Stock of TOYS, GAMES, and FANCY GOODS, at the above
Establishment, where, if they do not wish to purchase, they may pass an
agreeable half hour.

                                * * * * *



BLAKE,


                             (LATE GIBBONS,)
                CONFECTIONERY & GENERAL REFRESHMENT ROOMS,
                              EASTGATE ROW,
                                 CHESTER.

                                * * * * *

               SOUPS, STEAKS, CHOPS, COFFEE, TEA, &c., &c.

                  LEMONADE, SODA WATER, AND GINGER BEER.

                           MELTON MOWBRAY PIES.

                                * * * * *

                   GENTLEMEN’S CLOTHING ESTABLISHMENT,
                      5, BRIDGE STREET ROW, CHESTER,

                                * * * * *

                                G. MARSH,
                            TAILOR AND DRAPER.

                                * * * * *

          MADE TO MEASURE, AN EXCELLENT SUIT OF BLACK FROM 55s.

                           FUNERALS FURNISHED.

                                * * * * *



W. A. BILLINGTON,
CONFECTIONER & BRIDE-CAKE MAKER,
45, WATERGATE ROW, CHESTER.


        (Within two minutes’ walk of City Walls, Racecourse, &c.)

         Parties Visiting Chester will find his Refreshment Rooms

                               REPLETE WITH
                  SOUPS, STEAKS, PIES, JELLIES, PASTRY,
                               IN VARIETY.
               TEA AND COFFEE, BURTON ALES, LONDON PORTER.

                                * * * * *



A BEAUTIFUL ASSORTMENT OF
WRITING DESKS, INKSTANDS, ETC.,


                AND OTHER ARTICLES SUITABLE FOR PRESENTS,

                    BEST RUSSIA LEATHER WRITING CASES,

                   Despatch Boxes, and Tourists’ Cases,

                                    AT
                              HUGH ROBERTS’,
                          EASTGATE ROW, CHESTER.

                                * * * * *

                AGENT TO THE LONDON STEREOSCOPIC COMPANY.

                                * * * * *

                               STEREOSCOPES
                            FROM 3s. 6d, EACH.
                 A LARGE NUMBER OF SLIDES ALWAYS ON HAND.

                                * * * * *



W. W. BRITTAIN,
Woollen Draper, Tailor, and Hatter,
BRIDGE STREET ROW,
CHESTER.


                           FUNERALS FURNISHED.

                                * * * * *



HARRISON,
JOINER AND BUILDER,


                      KING STREET, NORTHGATE STREET,
                                 CHESTER.

                                * * * * *

                      SEASONED AND PREPARED TIMBER,
     Doors, Sashes, Architraves, Skirtings, Staircases, Shop Fronts,

                             AND ALL KINDS OF

                              JOINERS’ WORK,

         OF FIRST-RATE QUALITY, EXECUTED ON THE SHORTEST NOTICE.

                                * * * * *



CLAYTON, SHUTTLEWORTH, & CO.,
STAMP END WORKS, LINCOLN,


                                   AND

                     78, LOMBARD STREET, LONDON, E.C.

                                * * * * *

                     IMPROVED PORTABLE STEAM ENGINES.

The large and increasing demand for CLAYTON, SHUTTLEWORTH, & CO.’S Steam
Engines and Machinery, together with the numerous and flattering
testimonials daily received, is a sufficient proof of the high estimation
in which they are held, both in this and foreign countries, and renders
it quite unnecessary to say much upon the subject in an Advertisement.
_Already more than two thousand seven hundred have been manufactured_,
upwards of five hundred of which, of various powers, were disposed of
within the last twelve months.  Simplicity of construction, combined with
correct principles, excellence of workmanship, and quality of materials,
are the aim of CLAYTON, SHUTTLEWORTH, & CO., in all their manufactures.

Full particulars, in Illustrated Catalogues, on application.

                         [Picture: Steam Engine]



CLAYTON, SHUTTLEWORTH, AND CO.’S COMBINED BOULTING, THRASHING, STRAW
SHAKING, RIDDLING, AND WINNOWING MACHINE.


                       [Picture: Winnowing machine]

This Machine took the First Prize at the Royal Agricultural Society’s
Meeting at Lewes, 1852; also at Lincoln, 1854; and at Carlisle, 1855, was
awarded the Honorary Silver Medal, with a High Commendation, for the
introduction of a Patent Apparatus for Separating the Corn and Delivering
it in Sacks ready for Market.  This is an object often attempted, but
never before effectually accomplished by a Portable Machine.  As a proof
of the superiority of C., S., & Co.’s Combined Thrashing Machines over
all others, they think the following extract, copied from the Judge’s
Report of the Royal Agricultural Society’s Meeting, held at Lincoln,
1854, is sufficient to establish their well-earned reputation:—

    “Not long since the farmer was satisfied to thrash an increased
    quantity of corn by the application of steam power to the old
    thrashing box.  Soon he finds he must have his corn partially
    dressed; but now he must have it finished, sacked, and weighed for
    market.

    “For these last improvements we are much indebted to Messrs. Clayton
    and Shuttleworth; and here I must remark that they were rather in
    advance of the Society, for they brought out their finishing Machine
    at Lewes previously to a prize being offered.

    “_Portable Thrashing Machines_, _not exceeding Eight Horse Power_,
    _with Straw Shaker_, _Riddle_, _and Winnower_, _that will best
    prepare for the finishing Dressing Machine—to be driven by Steam_.

    “The Prize of £20 was awarded to Messrs. Clayton and Shuttleworth,
    the performances of whose Machine were, on the whole, superior to any
    other, and its construction inferior to none.”

                           FIXED STREAM ENGINE.

Of this work the Judges of the Lincoln Meeting report—“Too much can
scarcely be said in its praise, for it was next to impossible for a
machine to thrash and dress corn in a better manner.  There was neither
tail corn amongst the best, nor best corn amongst the tail; and the
latter was again separated into marketable, chicken corn, whites, seeds,
&c., each delivered into sacks from separate spouts.”

       [Picture: Six-horse Power Horizontal Cylinder Steam Engine]

The above Engraving represents a Six-horse Power Horizontal Cylinder
Steam Engine, erected complete upon metal foundation plate, which
arrangement renders it easy of removal—an important point to a Tenant
Farmer.  The principle of this Engine is direct action, which simplifies
the whole arrangement, inasmuch as the working parts are fewer in number,
more compact, and less likely to get out of repair.  Being secured upon
one bedplate renders it unnecessary to have any bearings or fastenings in
the partition or adjoining walls of the building in which it is inclosed.

It is supplied with Cylindrical Cornish Boiler of ample size and
strength, the whole being made of the very best material, fitted and
finished in a style equal to any house in the trade.

N.B.—As different situations, in almost every case, involve special
arrangements, C. S., & Co. will be happy to furnish Plans and
Specifications where fixed machinery is required.

                         PORTABLE GRINDING MILL.

                         [Picture: Grinding Mill]

                       CLAYTON, SHUTTLEWORTH, & CO.

Call attention to their GRINDING MILL, which has taken the Prize year
after year; also, Sawing Machinery, Irrigating Machinery, to be driven by
their Portable Engines, &c., &c., particulars of which, in an Illustrated
Catalogue, will be forwarded free, on application to the

                         STAMP END WORK, LINCOLN.

                                    OR
                     78, LOMBARD STREET, LONDON, E.C.

               Royal Agricultural Society, Chester Meeting.

                                * * * * *



JOHN WARNER, AND SONS,
Hydraulic Engineers, and Bell and Brass Founders to Her Majesty,


                    8, CRESCENT, CRIPPLE GATE, LONDON;
    And at the Royal Agricultural Society’s Show at Chester, where the
                            following and many
                other articles may be seen at their stand.

                     [Picture: Patent Cast Iron Pump]

Patent Cast Iron PUMP, fitted with J. W. & Sons’ Patent Bucket and
Sucker, which cannot clog in action, for Farms, Cottages, Manure Tanks,
and Wells not exceeding 28 feet.

      Dia.            Height.           £      s.
2½ in. short      1 ft. 7 in.           1      10
2½ in. long       3 ,, 3 ,,             1      14
3 ,,              3 ,, 6 ,,             2       8
3½ ,,             3 ,, 6 ,,             2      12
4 ,,              3 ,, 6 ,,             3       3
2½ in. short, with 15 ft. of Lead       2      14
Pipe attached, ready for fixing
2½ in. long       do., do.              2      18

               [Picture: Patent Brass lift and force pump]

Patent Brass LIFT and FORCE PUMP, on Plank, for House purposes, supply of
Cisterns, &c.

Dia.                                                         £      s.
2½ inch                                                      6       0
3                                                            7       5
3½                                                           8       0
A lighter Pump, of 3 inches diameter, can be supplied,       5      15
if required, at

                      [Picture: Liquid manure pump]

IMPROVED LIQUID MANURE, OR GENERAL PORTABLE PUMP.

These Pumps are fitted with J. W. & Sons’ Patent Bucket and Sucker, and
cannot clog in action.  The Barrel is of Galvanized Iron, not likely to
corrode, and can be raised or lowered at pleasure.  The Legs will fold
together, and the whole may be carried on the shoulder to any pond or
tank required.

                 Larger sizes of the above, if required.

   Price of 4½ in. Liquid Manure Pump, with legs, £3 3s.; 1¾ in. Gutta
                           Percha Suction Pipe,
1s. 11d. per foot; 2 in. Flexible Rubber and Canvas Suction Pipe, 3s. per
                                  foot.
       The Barrel is 27½ inches long, and the legs are 5 feet high.

                        [Picture: Brass syringe?]

                     BRASS SYRINGES, from 9s. to 18s.

                     CONSERVATORY PUMP, No. 32, with
                  Warner’s Registered Spreader, 27s. 6d.

                   [Picture: Spreader? and sheep bells]

Warner’s Cattle and Sheep Bells, in Sets of 6, with straps, per set, 13s.

Musical Sheep Bells, with straps, in sets of 6, 19s.; ditto, in sets of
8, 25s.; ditto, in sets of 12, 38s.

The great 16-ton Bell, for the Houses of Parliament, was made by J.
Warner and Sons, 1856, under their Patent.

Patent Church, Turret, and Alarm Bells, of all sizes, at per pound.  Old
Church Bells Recast, or taken in exchange.

Galvanized Iron Tub GARDEN ENGINE, with Warner’s Registered Spreader, is
strongly recommended for durability and low price, viz., £219s., to hold
10 gallons.  Larger sizes can be had, in either wood or iron.  Also
Warner’s Swing Water-Barrow, to hold 40 gallons, £3 3s.

May be obtained of any Ironmonger or Plumber, in town or country; or of
the Patentees and Manufacturers (as above).

                                * * * * *



LISTON’S LIVER PILLS,

  PREPARED    [Picture: Royal coat of arms]     ONLY BY

                              PLATT AND SON;
                         CHEMISTS TO HER MAJESTY,
                              EASTGATE ROW.

                                * * * * *



W. FARISH’S
Commercial Temperance Hotel,


                           No, 6, BROOK STREET,
                     LATE OF EGERTON STREET, CHESTER,

Is conveniently situated for business, in the leading thoroughfare to the
City, within five minutes’ walk of the Railway Station and Post Office,
and is fitted with a view to the comfort of Commercial Gentlemen,
Visitors, &c.

                                * * * * *

                _Omnibuses pass to and from every Train_.

                                * * * * *



J. E. EWEN,


                             HOSIER, GLOVER,
                                   AND
                           SHIRT MANUFACTURER,

                      8, BRIDGE STREET ROW, CHESTER.

                                * * * * *



T. WILCOCK & SON,
FAMILY GROCERS, TEA DEALERS,


                                   AND
                          ITALIAN WAREHOUSEMEN,
                        67, EASTGATE ROW, CHESTER.

                                * * * * *



MESSRS. LOWNDES AND SMITH


                      [Picture: Royal coat of arms]

Beg to inform the Farmers, Gentry, and inhabitants of Cheshire, that they
have been appointed sole Agents for the undermentioned Collieries, &c:—

                INCE HALL COAL AND CANNEL COMPANY, WIGAN;

       Messrs. HAWORTH & THOMPSON, Trydelger Lodge, near Mold; and

                     MR. THOMAS TICKERS, MANCHESTER,
           For the Sale of his celebrated Manure, known as the
                   BRITISH FERTILIZER; SUPERPHOSPHATE,
                            AND BOILED BONES.

                                * * * * *

    N.B.—HENRI and CO.’s Patent Horse and Cattle Feed always on hand.

_Office_, _No._ 5, _Railway Coal Station_, _Chester_.

                                * * * * *



BONES & GUANO


      [Picture: Graphic of Bones & Guano banner with man ploughing]

                      LIEBIG STEAM POWER BONE MILLS.

                                * * * * *

                       Ground Bones, various sizes.

                                * * * * *

                     DISSOLVED BONES, WARRANTED PURE.

                                 APPLY TO
                             ARNOTT BROTHERS,
                                LIVERPOOL.

                   AGENTS FOR “GRAY’S” SCOTTISH PLOUGHS
                             AND IMPLEMENTS;
              HORNSBY’S NORFOLK FARM MACHINES, ENGINES, &c.

                                * * * * *



WILLIAM BOX,
Gas Fitter, Brass Finisher, Brazier,


                             AND BELL HANGER,

                BROOK STREET, NEAR FRODSHAM STREET BRIDGE,
                                 CHESTER.

                                * * * * *

       Chandeliers, and every description of Gas Fittings supplied,
               and neatly repaired on the shortest notice.

                                * * * * *

                         BRONZING AND LACQUERING
                DONE ON THE PREMISES ON REASONABLE TERMS.

                                * * * * *

              REPAIRS EXECUTED IN ALL THE VARIOUS BRANCHES.

                                * * * * *



Bride Cake Manufacturer

        BY          [Picture: Royal coat of arms]          TO
   APPOINTMENT                                         THE QUEEN.

                             RICHARD BOLLAND,
                              CONFECTIONER,
                          EASTGATE ROW, CHESTER,

                   _Successor to the late Mrs. Thomas_.

           (NO OTHER PERSON HAVING THE PURCHASE AND USE OF HER
             RECEIPTS FOR THE MANUFACTURING OF BRIDE CAKES.)

                                * * * * *

                            Wedding Breakfasts
                       FURNISHED IN WHOLE OR PART.

                                * * * * *

                        PIC-NIC PARTIES SUPPLIED.

                                * * * * *

                  _FRENCH AND ORNAMENTAL CONFECTIONERY_.

                                * * * * *

  Parties visiting Chester will find his Refreshment Rooms replete with
            Soups, Pies, Jellies, Ices, and Pastry in variety.

                                * * * * *



J. KEARTLAND,


                     WHOLESALE AND RETAIL TEA DEALER,
                     FAMILY GROCER, AND HOP MERCHANT,
                        140, UPPER BRIDGE STREET,
                                 CHESTER.

                                * * * * *



MESSRS. WILDIG & WILLIAMS,


            PLUMBERS, GLAZIERS, BRASSFOUNDERS, AND GASFITTERS,

                         CUPPIN STREET, CHESTER.

                                * * * * *



JOHN HITCHEN,
SURVEYOR, BUILDER, AND CONTRACTOR,


                               EATON ROAD,

                                 CHESTER.

                                * * * * *



THOMAS DAVIES,
DRAPER, SILK MERCER, ETC.,


                              LONDON HOUSE,
                  BRIDGE STREET, AND BRIDGE STREET ROW,
                       (OPPOSITE GROSVENOR STREET,)
                                 CHESTER.

                                * * * * *



JOHN & THOMAS HIGGINS,
WOOLLEN DRAPERS AND HATTERS,


                     14, BRIDGE STREET ROW, CHESTER.

                           FUNERALS FURNISHED.

                                * * * * *



THOMAS GIBBS & CO.,


                                   THE
                                 SEEDSMEN

                                  TO THE
                  Royal Agricultural Society of England,

                                CORNER OF
                      HALF-MOON STREET, PICCADILLY,
                                 LONDON,

Beg to announce that they supply Mixtures of Grass Seeds for permanent
Pastures and Meadows, Parks or Field Lawns, Cemeteries, Garden Lawns, and
Grass Plots, &c., &c.

                 AGRICULTURAL SEEDS OF ALL DESCRIPTIONS.
                      KITCHEN GARDEN & FLOWER SEEDS,
              in assorted Packets, or separately, to order.

                                * * * * *

            Shipping Orders carefully executed to any extent.

                                * * * * *

Priced Lists forwarded on application to

                           THOMAS GIBBS & CO.,

                                   Corner of HALF-MOON STREET, PICCADILLY,
                                                                LONDON, W.

                                * * * * *



HUGH ROBERTS’
General Circulating Library and News-Room,
EASTGATE ROW, CHESTER.


                                * * * * *

                          TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION.

Allowed at one        Year.                      Half-year.                 Quarter.                   Month.
time.
                          £        s.        d.      £        s.        d.      £        s.        d.      £        s.        d.
One Set of Books          1         1         0      0        13         0      0         8         0      0         3         6
Two Ditto                 1         8         0      0        17         0      0        10         6      0         4         6
Three Ditto               1        18         0      1         5         0      0        16         0      0         6         6
Four Ditto                2         2         0      1         7         0      0        17         0      0         7         6

         A Magazine or Review is allowed with each of the above.

Reading Societies, Book Clubs, or Families residing in the same vicinity,
are supplied at the rate of £5 per Twenty Volumes, with liberty to
exchange them at pleasure.

Single Subscription to the Library and News-Room, One Guinea per Annum,
payable in advance.

                                * * * * *



ROYAL AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY OF ENGLAND.
CHESTER MEETING, 1858.


                                * * * * *

                             SMITH AND ASHBY,
                  Agricultural Implement Manufacturers,
                         STAMFORD, LINCOLNSHIRE,

Beg to direct attention to their celebrated HAYMAKING MACHINES, Patent
Steel Tooth HORSE RAKES, Patent Wheel HAND RAKES, New Patent Improved
CHAFF-CUTTING MACHINES, Oil Cake Mills, and Horse Works, They also invite
special notice of their New TWO-AND-A-HALF HORSE PORTABLE STEAM ENGINE,
for agricultural and general use, with compact Thrashing Machine,
Grinding Mill Chaff Cutter, Root Pulper, Cake Mill, Corn Crusher, and
Circular Saw Bench to attach to ditto.  Now exhibiting at their stand,
No. 27, in the Show-yard.

           [Picture: Smith & Ashby’s original patent haymaker]

This is the Machine that took the £5 prize against Mr. Nicholson’s
Haymaker, at the GREAT WATERFORD TRIAL, last August (1857), immediately
after the Salisbury Show.  The above trial was conducted under the
direction of the same Judge who was engaged at the Royal Society’s Trials
at Salisbury.  The circumstance proves that Smith and Ashby’s Machine is
the best Haymaker in use.  This celebrated Machine has taken Thirty-one
First-class Prizes, and has stood the test of twelve years.

N.B.—S. & A. are now constructing all their Haymakers on their original
patent principle, and exactly like the one that took the Prize at
Waterford; and they warrant every Machine they send out.  Price £15 15s.

☞ Smith & Ashby’s Haymaker has just taken the Prize of the Royal Bath and
West of England Society, at Cardiff.



SMITH & ASHBY’S PATENT HORSE RAKE
FOR HAY, CORN, COUCH GRASS, STUBBLE, &c.


                                * * * * *

SALISBURY REPORT, 1857.—Messrs. SMITH AND ASHBY’S Horse Rake, with Patent
Steel Teeth, was next tried.  It is the old original Stamford Rake
improved.  It is light, but works remarkably well.  The teeth are made of
steel.  It drew up heavy grass better than any other, and it clean-raked
admirably; it is also adapted for twitch or scutch grass.  A prize was
awarded.—_See Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society of England_,
1857.

This Rake has taken the First Prize of the Royal Society of Ireland two
years in succession—at Athlone, 1856, and at Carlow, 1855—against all the
best rakes in the kingdom; it has also received the Certificate of Honour
from the London, the Dublin, and the Paris Agricultural Exhibitions, and
above Twenty Prizes from various other Societies.  Price £7 10s.  If with
Steel Teeth, £8.

                 Smith & Ashby’s New Two-and-a-half Horse
                          PORTABLE STEAM ENGINE,

which for power and cheapness surpasses everything of the kind yet
brought out.  It is adapted for the purpose of driving Chaff Cutters,
Corn Crushers, Grinding Mills, Oil-cake Breakers, Thrashing Machines,
Root Pulpers, Circular Saws, Pumps, &c., &c.  Price £65.

                 [Picture: Smith & Ashby’s Steam Engine]

                        SPECIMEN OF TESTIMONIALS.

                        “_Westwood_, _Bradford_, _Wilts_, _Jan._ 31, 1858.

    “GENTLEMEN,—Having now worked your little Engine for the last month,
    and having found it quite capable of doing more than I expected, I
    write to inform you that I am perfectly satisfied with it.  I have
    attached it to my Thrashing Machine, and find that by working up to
    35 lb. to 40 lb. pressure, it performs its work in first-rate style.
    I have fitted a pulley of 6½ inches diameter on the drum spindle, and
    can thrash three sacks an hour of wheat or barley with ease.  JOHN
    SPACKMAN.”

                  SMITH & ASHBY’S PATENT CHAFF CUTTERS,

Universally acknowledged to be the most simple, and at the same time they
are well known to be amongst the most efficient and most noted Chaff
Cutters in the world.  They are fitted with S. & A.’s new Patent Presser
for preventing breakage when over fed, and also with their Patent Safety
Apparatus for preventing accidents to the men employed to feed them.

For Prices and Testimonials, see S. & A.’s Catalogue, to be had, post
free, on application to RUTLAND TERRACE IRON WORKS, STAMFORD,
LINCOLNSHIRE.

                                * * * * *



TO TOURISTS & TRAVELLERS,


Visitors to the Sea Coast, and to those who enjoy the Fashionable
Promenade, the Ride and Drive; in all cases Fervid Heat, and its
concomitant Dust, materially injure the Skin, producing Sunburn, Tan,
Freckles, and Discolorations of an almost indelible character.  To
obviate and eradicate these baneful results, recourse may with confidence
be had to

                            ROWLANDS’ KALYDOR,

an Oriental and Botanical Preparation.  Whether resorted to in its
specific character as a thorough purifier of existing defects of an
eruptive nature, and discolorations of the skin, or as a benign Preserver
and Promoter of its already bright and glowing tints this,

                         ELEGANT TOILET REQUISITE

     has, in every instance, maintained its claim to the title of the
                  “UNFAILING AUXILIARY OF FEMALE GRACE.”

During SUMMER and AUTUMN, which are peculiarly the seasons of Fashionable
Movements, the invigorating and refreshing properties of ROWLANDS’
KALYDOR will be found singularly agreeable to

                            LADIES TRAVELLING.

The effects produced by temporary exposure to solar heat, upon the Face,
Neck, Arms, and Hands being neutralized, and the cloud induced by
relaxation and languor dispelled by its power of sustaining a perfect
elasticity of the skin; without which certain deterioration takes place;
thus in the usual periodical visits made to the coast, Rowlands’ Kalydor
is indispensable as a preservative of the skin after

                               SEA BATHING,

from the irritation caused by the chemical action of the saline vapour.

      CAUTION:—The words “ROWLANDS’ KALYDOR” are on the Wrapper, and
  “A. ROWLAND & SONS” in red ink at foot.  Price 4s. 6d. and 8s. 6d. per
                                 bottle.

                                * * * * *

 The heat of Summer frequently communicates a dryness to the hair, and a
   tendency to fall off, which may be completely obviated by the use of

                         ROWLANDS’ MACASSAR OIL,

      A delightfully fragrant and transparent preparation, and as an
        invigorator and purifier of the Hair beyond all precedent.

                                * * * * *

Nor at this season of the year can we be too careful to preserve the
Teeth from the deleterious effects of Vegetable Acids (the immediate
cause of Tooth-ache) by a systematic employment, night and morning, of

                            ROWLANDS’ ODONTO.
                          OR, PEARL DENTIFRICE,

a White Powder, compounded of the rarest and most fragrant exotics.  It
bestows on the Teeth a Pearl-like Whiteness, frees them from the Tartar,
and imparts to the Gums a healthy firmness, and to the Breath a grateful
sweetness and purity.  Price 2s. 9d. per box.

          Sold by A. ROWLAND & SONS, 20, Hatton Garden, London,
                      and by Chemists and Perfumers.

                   *** BEWARE OF SPURIOUS IMITATIONS!!!

                                * * * * *



Royal Insurance Company
CAPITAL £2,000,000 IN 100,000 SHARES OF £20 EACH.


     [Picture: Royal Insurance Buildings, North John St. & Dale St.,
                                Liverpool]

                                 TRUSTEES

         JOHN SHAW LEIGH, Esq., . . . and . . . JOHN NAYLOR, Esq.

                          DIRECTORS IN LIVERPOOL

                   Chairman . . . CHARLES TURNER, Esq.

  Deputy Chairmen . . . RALPH BROCKLEBANK, Esq. & EDWARD JOHNSTON, Esq.

T. D. ANDERSON, ESQ.    THOMAS DOVER, ESQ.      JAMES LAWRENCE, ESQ.
MICHAEL BELCHER, ESQ.   JAMES HOLME, ESQ.       ROBERT M‘ANDREW, ESQ.
GEORGE BOOKER, ESQ.     THOMAS D. HORNBY,       W. J. MARROW, ESQ.
THOMAS BOUCH, ESQ.      ESQ.                    FRANCIS MAXWELL, ESQ.
MICHAEL BOUSFIELD,      GEO. H. HORSFALL,       WILLIAM SMITH, ESQ.
ESQ.                    ESQ.                    JOHN TORR ESQ.
DAVID CANNON ESQ.       RICHARD HOUGHTON,
                        ESQ.
                        ROGER LYON JONES,
                        ESQ.

                           London Establishment

       No. 29,             [Picture: London           CORNER OF
                            Establishment
   LOMBARD STREET,            building]            CLEMENT’S LANE.

                           DIRECTORS IN LONDON

 Chairman . . . SAMUEL BAKER, Esq. | Secretary . . . J. B. JOHNSTON, Esq.

ROBERT B. BYASS, ESQ.   THOMAS LANCASTER,       DANIEL H. RUCKER,
RICHARD C. COLES,       ESQ.                    ESQ.
ESQ.                    EDWARD MACMURDO, ESQ.   WM. WAINWRIGHT, ESQ.
HENRY KENDALL, ESQ.     HENRY M‘CHLERY, ESQ.    J. WESTMORLAND, ESQ.

                    THE FOLLOWING FIGURES EXHIBIT THE
           RAPID GROWTH & INCREASING RESOURCES OF THE COMPANY.

Fire Premiums   1848           £31,346  Fire                £151,733
                                        Premiums—1856
                1850            44,027  Whilst last          175 000
                                        year, 1857,
                                        they were
                1852            76,925  Total                260,000
                                        Revenue,
                                        1857, all
                                        sources
                1854           128,459  Increase on           40,000
                                        ONE YEAR
                                        alone

            Funds in hand, to meet any Claims, over £600,000.

                                                            PERCY M. DOVE,
                                                      Actuary and Manager.



THE ROYAL INSURANCE COMPANY.


                                   LIFE

  Large Bonus Declared—£2 per Cent. per Annum on the Sum Assure, on all
                Policies of Two Years standing or upwards.

EXAMPLE—Policy,          £1000  dated 1845.
                           180  Bonus 1864.
                         £1180  Sum now Insured, subject to Future
                                Increase.

                  DIVISION OF PROFITS EVERY FIVE YEARS.

LOANS ON LIFE POLICIES, with undoubted Personal Security, may, under
certain circumstances, be granted.

DAYS OF GRACE allowed with the most liberal interpretation.  (See late
Advertisements).

ANNUITIES granted on favourable terms, and every reasonable facility
given.

                       PROGRESS OF THE LIFE BRANCH

“New Policies for the Year ending

                     POLICIES ISSUED.   SUM ASSURED.   PREMIUM
JUNE,      1855                    396       £166,864        £4,867
   ,,      1856                    654        288,321         8,370
   ,,      1867                    756        391,158        11,894

    “Thus the New Assurers for the Year ending June, 1857, are 160 per
    Cent. above those for the Year ending June, 1855.”

                    STATEMENTS OF THE “LONDON TIMES.”

The City Article of the “London Times” of the 24th July, 1156, states
that the transactions of the Royal Insurance Company “appear to have been
of a perfectly satisfactory character.”  It includes the following
statements confirmatory of that opinion:—

                                PREMIUMS.

The Premiums of Nine Offices enumerated, are stated to        £824,924
be
Of which The Royal alone amount to                             371,957
being 82 per Cent. of the accumulated Premiums of the remaining Eight
Companies.

                               EXPENDITURE.

_The Times’_ Article exhibits the Expenditure likewise of the “ROYAL” in
most favourable contrast to that of others.  The statement of “The Times”
has elicited the following remarks from a contemporary:—Here again, the
Royal Insurance Company occupies a position of honourable pre-eminence;
for while its expense of management, spread over a period of three years,
has been less than 20 per Cent., those of five other offices, extending
over an equal time—for we omit those which have been established within
three years, or we might make a much stronger case—have varied from 22
to74 per Cent., and in one case have been as high as 111 per Cent. on the
receipts.

                                RESOURCES.

In like manner, the entire Funds in hand of thirteen offices are quoted,
in “The Times,” at £1,238,688, including the Royal, which alone is
£372,394, and which is, therefore, equal to 43 per Cent. of the
accumulated funds of the remaining twelve offices, viz. for the Year
1855.  Since increased to £600,000.

                 EXTRACTS FROM REPORT FOR THE YEAR 1856.
                             FIRE DEPARTMENT.

    “In directing the attention of the Proprietors to the continued and
    continuing increase of the Fire Department, the Directors on this
    occasion prefer to cite the proofs afforded by public Official
    Documents rather than to offer anticipations founded solely on their
    own investigations.

    “They are now enabled to exhibit the advance in the British Fire
    Business of the Company, on the indisputable evidence of the
    “Parliamentary Return of Duty paid to Government” in the year 1856,
    recently ordered to be printed by the House of Commons.

    “The Statistics of that Return establish the fact, than which none
    can be conceived more fitted to prove that No Insurance Company,
    ancient or modern, is advancing more speedily than the Royal
    Insurance Company in the confidence of the British People.

              THE ROYAL INSURANCE COMPANY’S LIST OF AGENTS.
                            ENGLAND AND WALES.

  The Directors are willing to appoint Agents of undoubted position and
      respectability in every Town where not at present represented.
                 Those Marked thus * are Fire Agents only

AGENCIES.                    AGENTS.
Abergavenny                  Mr. Jas. Jones
Abingdon                     G. Davis
  Do.                        Cousins *
Accrington                   M. Wilson
Acton                        G. Wiltshire
Alcester                     H. Harrison
Alford                       J. C. S. Milns *
Alton                        H. Gripper
Alnmondbury                  E. Dyson
Alnmouth                     A. Robson
Amersham                     F. Charsley
Armley                       R. Hoyle
Ash (Sandwich)               W. Stiff *
Ashborne                     J. Smith
Ashford                      Perkins & Pope
  Do.                        Mr. T. J. Morris
Assington                    C. Green
Ashton-u-Lyne                S. Vernon
Aston                        John Parry
Atherstone                   J. G. Arnold
Atherton                     Warburton
Attercliffe                  B. Johnson *
Audlem                       T. Mousley
Aylesbury                    Muddiman
  Do.                        Stedman
Banbury                      J. B. Lythall
Barrow                       Walton & Mawson
Barnet                       Mr. S. Harris
Barnsley                     J. Smith
Barnstaple                   S. W. M. W. Guppy
Batley                       Mr. Scholefield
Bath                         T. Weston
Bath                         J. M. Ostler *
Bayswater                    Richardson
Bebington                    J. Colbeck
Beccles                      A. G. Love
Bedford                      G. H. Miller & Son
Bedale                       Mr. E. Fouler
Bermondsey                   H. Austin
Beverley                     J. M. Robinson
Bicester                     E. Heritage
Bideford                     T. Norman
Biggleswade                  J. F. Hunt
Billericay                   John Smith
Bilston                      J. S. Lister
Birstall                     R. Rayner
Birmingham                   E. C. Browne, Mid. Dist. Agent
  Do.                        Mr. John Leah
  Do.                        J. C. Abbott & Co.
Blackheath                   Mr. A. J. Martin
Blackburn                    Kaney & Edge
  Do.                        R. Townley
Bolton-le-Moors              E. S. Kearsley
Boroughbridge                J. Broadbent
Boston                       W. Roberts
Bottesford                   C. H. Gordon *
Bournemouth                  M‘William *
Bradford                     J. R. Silcock
  Do.                        J. Garbutt
Braintree                    W. H. Simons
Brentwood                    R. Wilks
Brightlingsea                W. D. Minter
Brighton                     J. Rogers
Brighton                     C. Cobby
  Do.                        S. Saunders
  Do.                        G. Smith
Bridgend                     J. Griffiths
Bridgewater                  P. O. H. Reed
Bristol                      J. Burbidge, Wes. Dis. Agent
  Do.                        Taylor & Co.
  Do.                        M. Alman
  Do.                        W. Griffin *
Bromsgrove                   W. Weaver
Bromyard                     Thos. Nott
Bures St. Mary               J. Dupont
Burdensball                  G. Young *
Burnley                      R. Law
  Do.                        J. Roberts
Burton-on-Trent              F. J. Parsons
Bury                         W. Leeming
B. St. Edmunds               Ridley, jun.
B. Wearmouth                 Robinson
Caermarthon                  H. Smith & Co.
Camberwell                   Mr. S. Swan
Cambridge                    J. Adams
  Do.                        Wetenhall
  Do.                        A. Shippey *
Carlisle                     Mr. Carruthers
Cardiff                      J. Gordon
Cardigan                     W. G. George
Castletown                   W. Brown
Charlton                     J. N. Allen
Chatham                      H. Ralph
Chelmsford                   W. H. Bennett
  Do.                        A. Darby
Cheltenham                   J. Acock
Chester                      Messrs. Minshull and Hughes
  Do.                        Mr. T. Fluitt
Chichester                   J. B Lipscomb
Chipping Ongar               J. Drake
Chorley                      Houghton
Chorlton-upon-Medlock        Wm. Moore
Church                       M. Cooper
Clapham                      F. Temple
Clerkenwell                  Hasleham
Clitheroe                    J. Eastham
Clun                         J. Hamar
Cockermouth                  T. F Taylor
Coggeshall                   A. Wheeler
Colchester                   R. Hayward
  Do.                        J. W. Jackson
Colebrookdale                J. Bratton
Collumpton                   J. Foster
Colne                        R. Watson
Colne Engaine                J. Appleby
Copford                      H. Bowles
Cosham                       T. B. Baker
Cowes                        O. Wheeler
Coventry                     J. Porter
  Do.                        Jos. Clarke
Crawley                      H. Simmons
Crediton                     J. Corkram
Crewkerne                    J. E. Stansfield
Cricklade                    J. Newman
Croydon                      G. F. Dymond
Dawlish                      H. Jeffreys
Deal                         M. B. Sutton *
  Do.                        E. Drew
Dedham                       W. J. Page
Denbigh                      E. Davies
Derby                        W. Allen
  Do.                        B. Holmes
Dewsbury                     E. Taylor
  Do.                        J. Terry
Devonport                    Sam. Trend
  Do.                        J. A. Boolds
Dolgelly                     R. Williams
Doncaster                    C. Fisher
Douglas                      H. B. Watts
  Do.                        J. & W. Cowin
Dover                        Alex. Penny *
Dover                        Thos. Fox
Driffield                    W. Jarratt
Dudley                       J. Castree
Dufton                       J. Anderson
Durham                       T. Jones
Dunstable                    H. Lockhart
  Do.                        W. O. Elliott
Ealing                       J. H. Dorcester
Eccles                       J. W. Seed
Eccleshall                   Butterton
  Do.                        Greatrex *
Edgworth                     J. Hoyle
Edmonton                     G. Barker
Egham                        Geo. Tice
Elland                       G. Marshall
Ellesmere                    T. Jenkins
Epsom                        Langlands
Erith                        Tuckwell
Evesham                      R. Bult
Exeter                       E. Force
Falmouth                     A. L. Fox
Farndon                      W. Ramsey
Farrington                   A. S. Clayden
Faversham                    Mr. Thos. Goff
Filey                        E. W. Pritchard. M.D.
Flint                        Mr. J. Haywood
Folkestone                   Jas. Meikle
  Do.                        J. Sherwood
Frimley                      Wm. Kent
Frodsham                     J. Lewis
Frome                        R. A. Bedford
Garthmill                    J. Melling
Gisborough                   Thompson
Gloucester                   T. Taynton
Gloucester                   J. W. Wipgate
Gosport                      W. F. Burrell
Gravesend                    J. B. Cooper
  Do.                        W. Smith *
Great Marlow                 E. Segrave
Great Malvern                James Nott
  Do.                        J. H. Bennett
Great Sanghall               H. Roberts
Greenwich                    Cook
Grimsby                      Bennington
Gwennap                      A. Skewes
Hackney                      W. Gray & Son
Hadleigh                     W. Sewell
Halesowen                    W. H. Merrick
Halstead                     R. C. Hughes
Halifax                      J. Gelson
  Do.                        T. Sladdin *
Hanley                       J. C. Daniel
Hammersmith                  J. Cripps
Harwick                      R. Elliss
Harrowgate                   J. Wilson
Hartlepool                   J. Groves
Haslingden                   T. Woodcock
Hastings                     J. Banks
Haverford-West               B. Evenis
Hayle                        W. Hosken
Heckmondwike                 W. Sykes
Heckmondwike                 Cardwell
Helmsley                     T. Pape
Helston                      W. Penrose
Henley                       J. Lediard
Hereford                     F. W. Hollings
Hertford                     J. D. Medcalf
Heybridge                    R. Sadler
Hexham                       M. Taylor
Highgate                     J. Chambers
Highworth                    W. F. Jennings
Hinckley                     Brocklehurst
Hitchin                      T. Franklin
Hoddesdon                    H. M. Sparham
Holbeach                     J. R. Capp, jun.
Honley                       Wilkinson
Horsforth                    E. Battye
Hoxton                       W. Simons
Huddersfield                 G. H. Brook
Hull                         R. Brown
Hull                         G. W. Stourton
Huntingdon                   T. M. Hunter
Hythe                        D. Murphy
Hyde                         G. & T. S. Pickford
Ipswich                      Mr. Mason, jun.
Jersey                       W. Huelin
Keighley                     G. Spencer
Kelvedon                     W. Crane
Kendal                       W. Potter
Kenilworth                   R. R. Hicks
Kennington                   T. H. Wood *
Kidderminster                T. Griffin
Kildwick                     G. Holloway
Kingsbridge                  Jas. Adams
Kingston                     J. Boxall
Kirby                        J. Hignell
Kirkburton                   A. Hargreaves
Knightsbridge                C. Rayment
Knutsford                    W. Taylor
Lancaster                    T. Y. Welch
Landport                     W. H. Daw
Lambeth                      J. B. Downing
Leamington                   P. Locke
Leeds                        J. Maude
  Do.                        Wade
  Do.                        Jos. Shaw *
Leicester                    J. Wykes
Leigh                        J. Aspinall
Leigh’n Buzzard              T. Forth
Leominster                   Meredith
Lavenham                     H. Saffell
Lewes                        J. Smith
Lexden                       J. Crooks
Leytonstone                  W. Arber
Lichfield                    Underwood
Lincoln                      Thos. Plant
Liskeard                     J. Wenmoth
Llangollen                   J. Clarke
Long Melford                 W. Neep
Longton                      John Green
Loughborough                 W. Rowland
Louth                        J. Colam *
Lowestoft                    G. Thurlby
Lowestoft                    T. Small
Lutterworth                  C. H. Gates
Lynn                         Wm. Linay
The Lye                      Perry, jun.
Macclesfield                 John May
Madeley (Salop)              W. P. Bartley
  Do. (Stafford.)            T. C. Barton
Maidenhead                   F. Cooper
Maidstone                    J. Kemp
Malpas                       J. Keay
Malton                       J. Gibson
Manchester                   G. V. Ryder, Local Man.
  Do.                        J. Wrigley
Manchester                   J. Rusling
  Do                         Messrs. Yates & Corkling
  Do.                        Mr. S. R. Taylor
Marden                       W. Taylor
Markyate, St.                A. Rowley
Market Harbro’               H. Dwyer
Marsden                      Hesslegrave
Maryport                     D. Bowes
Melksham                     E. Eyres
Melton Mowbray               T. N. Wing
Messing                      H. Serjeant
Middleton                    J. Graves
Millwall                     H. Hooper
Milwich                      J. Hudson
Minsterly                    J. Davies
Mintlaw                      J. Pirie
Mirfield                     G. E. Kent
Mistley                      G. Cant
Mold                         R. Roberts
Monmouth                     T. J. A. Williams
Morice Town                  R. C. Bath
Moss Side                    Francis Potter
Mottram                      S. Oldham
Much Woolton                 Nicholson
Much Wenlock                 Geo. Burd
Nayland                      W. Littlebury
Neath                        J. Morgan
Neston                       J. Woodward
New Brentford                C. Combs
Newbury                      R. A. Ryott
Newcross                     G. A. Clymer
Newcastle-on-T.              Stevenson, Vermehren & Scott
Newton-le-Will.              W. Latham
  Do.                        Williams
Newtown                      W. Turner
Newton-Abbot                 S. Mudge
Newport                      H. Beynon
Newport                      S. Pring
Newton Heath                 G. C. Pott
North Shields                W. Harrison
Northwich                    G. Beckett
Norwich                      A. Preston
Norwich                      C. B. Daveney
  Do.                        Mr. H. Ludlow *
Nottinghill                  G. H. Clarke
Nottingham                   M. J. Preston
  Do.                        J. Kent
Nuneaton                     J. Adams
Oakhampton                   Newcombe
Oldham                       J. Schofield
Openshaw                     W. W. Bamford
Ormskirk                     R. Wareing, Esq.
Oswestry                     Geo. Owen
Ottery St. Mary              John Baker
Ovenden                      Hooson, jun.
Over Darden                  W. A. Briggs
Oxford                       Robert Stills *
Padiham                      R. Nelson
Patricroft                   T. Peters
Peel                         J. Morrison
Peckham                      C. S. Stevens
Pendleton                    R. Woodall
Penrith                      C. Fairer, Esq.
Pentonville                  M. E. Wesley
Penzance                     J. B. Read
Pembroke Dock                Jas. McLean
Pershore                     C. J. Pace
Plumstead                    Williamson
Plymouth                     J. Darve *
  Do.                        T. G. Pearse
  Do.                        J. W. Sparrow
Poole                        J. R. Justician
Ponty Pridd                  Wm. Davies
Portsea                      Totterdill
Portsmouth                   G. W. Vick
Preston                      Wm. Gray
Preston                      J. & R. S. Walker
Queenshead                   Mr. G. Turner
Radcliffe                    John Hamer
Rainhill                     Robinson
Ramsey                       D. Joughin
Ramsgate                     G. Griggs
Reading                      W. Brown
  Do.                        Cooper & Goulding
Reigate                      Mr. James Rees
Rhyl                         W. Hughes
Richmond                     M. H. Cooke
Richmond                     H. Cockburn
Rickmansworth                Taylor and Sons
Ripon                        Mr. Nicholson
Rochdale                     M. Weston
Rochester                    F. Furrell
Rotherham                    A. Fayram *
Rowhedge                     John Martin
Roydon                       Pamphilion
Royston                      Fred. King *
Ruabon                       Edw. Morris
Rugby                        W. C. Tait
Runcorn                      T. & W. Rigby
Ruthin                       Mr. H. Jones
Ryde                         W. Hansford
Rye                          T. Stonham
Saddleworth                  F. W. Roberts
Sale Moor                    Wm. Gandy
Salisbury                    G. Sutton
  Do.                        Jas. Lucas
Sandgate                     Wm. Hills
Sandwich                     W. W. Woodruff
Scarborough                  W. Robson
Shacklewell                  J. Overall
Sheffield                    T. Branson & Son
Sheffield                    Mr. J. Boss *
Shepton Mallet               J. H. Day
Shrewsbury                   C. G. Taylor
Shipston                     J. Fisher
Skipton                      Stockdale
Slough                       G. S. Emanuel
Snaith                       J. Norwood
Soham                        Joseph Floyd *
Southam                      J. C. Reed
Southampton                  A. H. Morant
  Do.                        S. Broad
  Do.                        F. Elliston *
Southminster                 E. Winterton *
Southwark                    W. & C. Pugh
  Do.                        Rice Brothers
South Lambeth                Mr. G. F. Jewell
Southsea                     T. & J. Hellis
South Shields                P. Thompson
Sowerby                      Eli Crossley
Staines                      R. Morford
Staly Bridge                 H. Heap
Stamford                     F. H. Jones
St. Austell                  J. Geldard
St. Albans                   Geo. Allan
St. Helen’s                  J. B. Barrow
St. Ives (Cornw.)            G. Hamlyn
St. Ives (Hunts)             F. W. Thorp
St. Neott’s                  F. Topham
Stockport                    John Nield
  Do.                        T. Deane, jun. & Brothers
Stokeby Nayland              Mr. F. Tippill
Stoke-on-Trent               W. Bailey
Stoke-on-Trent               J. Rowland
Stonehouse                   W. Wey
Stratford                    J. Pilkington
Stratford on Av.             J. W. Baylis
Stroud                       E. C. Little
Stratton                     W. Scown
Stretford                    J. Dewhurst
Sudbury                      R. Squire
Sunderland                   G. Shield
  Do.                        D. Davidson *
  Do.                        W. Watson
  Do.                        E. G. Joel
Swansea                      Wm. Sims
Swindon                      H. Reeves
Tadcaster                    B. B. Thompson
Tarporley                    Wm. Aston
Taunton                      C. M. Hinder
Tavistock                    J. Coleman Wills
Teignmouth                   T. Bining
Tendring                     H. Mash
Tewkesbury                   J. Packer
Thetford                     C. Smart
Thirsk                       J. Woodward
Thornsett                    J. M. Mosley
Tipton                       E. S. Creswell
Tiverton                     W. Vercoe *
Torquay                      Narracott, Brs.
Torrington                   F. Gaydon
Totness                      James Rees
Totness                      N. Manning
Tottenham                    John Brown
Trowbridge                   Nightingale
Tunbridge                    L. M. Wibmer
Tunbridge Wells              Tuck & Meager
Turnham Green                W. Platrier
Tyldesley                    Kirkpatrick
Ulverston                    J. P. & T. Postlethwaite
Usk                          Mr. H. Roberts
Uxbridge                     W. Gardiner
Ventnor                      T. Raynes
Wadebridge                   S. Pollard
Wakefield                    J. Ellerton
Walsall                      T. Booth
Wallingford                  W. H. Tinkler
Walthamstow                  J. Martin
Wantage                      Rose & Hatton
Ware                         T. Cox
Warminster                   C. Cruse
Warrington                   H. White
  Do.                        J. Harrison
Warwick                      E. C. Browne
Wednesbury                   F. W. Seaman
Weeley                       R. Bloom
Welwyn                       C. B. Freeman
Wellington and Shiffnal      J. Bidlake
Welchpool                    J. Whitehall
Wellington                   F. White
Wells                        H. K. Reynolds
Wem                          H. Kynaston
Wendover                     T. Scrivener
West Hartlepool              Pyman & English
Westbury                     Mr. R. G. Papps
West Mersea                  J. Mann
Westminster                  W. P. Metchin
Wetherby                     J. Hannam
Whitby                       Woodwark
Whitchurch                   T. Jarvis
Whitehaven                   C. Fisher
Whitstable                   F. W. Webster
Wigan                        Woodcock, Part and Scott
Wigton                       Mr. W. Robinson
Winchester                   W. Best
Witham                       F. Speakman
Witton Gilbert               John Barker
Woburn                       J. Clarke
Woodburn Green               W. Williams
Woodbridge                   W. J. Andrews
Woolwich                     J. W. Dicks
Woodstock                    Geo. Galt
Wolverhampton                T. Pinchard
  Do.                        H. Stuart
Workington                   J. Thompson, sen.
Worksop                      F. B. Falkner
Worcester                    J. Bennett
Wrexham                      John Clark
Yarmouth                     S. B. Cory
  Do.                        M. J. Harrison
Yeovil                       R. Vining
York                         W. & J. H. Simpson
  Do.                        Mr. Tenniswood

     [Picture: Graphic advert for Evans & Gresty, engravers, Chester]



HUGH ROBERTS


                            GENERAL PRINTING,

                   BOOK, AND STATIONARY ESTABLISHMENT,

                          EASTGATE ROW, CHESTER.

                                * * * * *

           Agent to the Atlas Fire and Life Assurance Offices.

                                * * * * *

                                 PRINTING

         Of every Description, neatly and expeditiously executed.

                   LITHOGRAPHIC & COPPER-PLATE PRINTING
                               BOOKBINDING

                     ON THE MOST APPROVED PRINCIPLE.

                                * * * * *

                       GENERAL LIBRARY AND NEWSROOM
                               16,000 Vols.

                                * * * * *

            AN EXTENSIVE AND WELL SELECTED STOCK OF HANDSOMELY
              AND PLAINLY BOUND BOOKS, SUITABLE FOR PRESENTS

                                * * * * *

                        PERIODICALS AND NEWSPAPERS

 Regularly supplied, and Foreign Books obtained to order through the most
                           expeditious agency.

      Books forwarded by Post (pre-paid) to any part of the Country.

                                * * * * *

                         MUSIC AND PIANO-FORTES.

                                * * * * *

       Depository for the Publications of the Society for Promoting
                           Christian Knowledge.

                                * * * * *

                        AN EXTENSIVE ASSORTMENT OF
               BIBLES, PRAYER BOOKS.  AND CHURCH SERVICES,
                       IN EVERY VARIETY OF BINDING.

                                * * * * *

                     _HUGH ROBERTS_.  _EASTGATE ROW_.




FOOTNOTES.


{7}  Rev. Chancellor Raikes’ Introductory Lecture before the Chester
Archæological Society.

{8}  This Earl was the first who assumed the present arms of Chester,
three wheat-sheaves in a field azure.

{14}  Ormerod’s Cheshire, page 173.

{40}  The largest stone arch known, that which bears the nearest
approach, is at Vieille Briode, which crosses the river Allien, in
France, whose span is 183 feet, being 17 feet less than the Chester
bridge.  It was erected in 1454, by Grenier.

{48}  Hemingway’s ‘History of Chester.’

{50}  Hemingway’s ‘History of Chester.’

{51}  Rev. Chancellor Raikes.

{75}  Mr. W. Ayrton, on the Norman Remains of the Cathedral.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROBERTS' CHESTER GUIDE [1858]***


******* This file should be named 62534-0.txt or 62534-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/2/5/3/62534


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

